---
title: A Critical Mass Of CS Teachers
date: 2022-03-21T13:38:49-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc
draft: false
--- 

A big difficulty with creating CS opportunities for all our students
is the lack of CS teachers. New York City addressed this problem with
their CS4All program - quick form PD to get teachers into CS
classrooms in a hurry. One can debate if that was the best way to go
but it enabled NYC to create a whole lot of CS classes in a very short
period of time.

Of course, these teachers, by and large, only have that short form PD
so I'd argue that this isn't a long term solution. I mean, you
wouldn't want your entire language program taught by people who
barely knew Spanish 1  or Math taught by teachers how don't know
beyond the basics of Algebra.

A number of institutions, including Hunter are working on rectifying
this via our CS Education programs. Some programs are legit, and some
practically as superficial as the short form PD but the legit ones are
trying to address the challenge.

I want to talk about why Hunter's Advanced Certificate program, a
program, that I might add, is currently accepting applicants for this
summer, is critical to the process.

Right now, you could place K12 CS teachers into one of the following
buckets:

 - People with strong CS backgrounds. CS Majors or people with
   industry experience.
 - Hobbyists who learned some CS on their own and developed an
   interest or passion for the subject.
 - Volunteers who are game for the challenge who heard about CS4All
   and answered the call.
 - Teachers who were voluntold who are taking one for the team.


Most of the home-brew CS programs in the city started with teachers
from the first two categories but currently the vast majority of
teachers teaching CS are in the last two. Eventually, CS classes in
NYC will all or mostly all be taught by qualified, certified CS teachers
but how we get there will make a difference in terms of the community
and culture we create.

Most of the approved certification programs in NY state award either a
Bachelors degree or a Masters. That is, they're designed for new
teachers just entering the profession. At Hunter we run a Masters
program. Our first cohort had 3 students, our second 6 and right now
there are 3 applicants for our third cohort. I haven't done any
advertising or outreach but over time we'll get more and more
applicants. It will be a slow process but eventually we'll have
comparable numbers as for our math and science ed programs. I'd
imagine that other programs across the state will have a similar
growth curve. As these programs graduate teachers, the voluntolds and
volunteers that aren't up to speed will return to their other
subjects. Some will continue to teach a section or two of CS which
is fine provided that by then their base of knowledge of CS and CS
pedagogy is well beyond the canned training that DOE currently
provides.

While eventually this will normalize, there is a problem. We're
basically asking our new CS teachers to also be our master CS
teachers, our CS teacher leaders. They'll have deep CS knowledge and
they'll have studied the CS pedagogy so it'll all be on them.

The trouble is that it's hard enough surviving as a new
teacher. Asking them to be the master teachers and the leaders at the
same time is just not right.

That's where my Advanced Certificate program at Hunter comes in. Right
now, we're the only such program in New York state. The program's an
18 credit masters level program that teaches the CS and the CS
pedagogy but understands that the participants are already experienced
teachers in some other subject area. It's a program that takes an
teacher who's already experienced, albeit in another subject area and
fills in the CS content and CS pedagogy gaps. 

I mentioned earlier that I've done zero outreach for our masters
program and that's because all my outreach has been for the Advanced
Cert. I think it's vitally important that we  build a critical mass of
highly qualified CS teachers as soon as possible. Taking current,
experienced teachers and bringing them up to speed in CS and teaching
CS is the way to do this. 

Other subjects already have their teacher leaders. In most schools, at
least in larger schools, there will be one or two "go to"
teachers. The ones that know the subject matter more deeply and how to
teach it, the ones who are up on the latest and greatest in the field
and in teaching, the ones who attend the conferences and bring back
best practices. I'm working to jump start that for New York City.

Fortunately, I'm not alone and our friends at [[https://gothamgives.org/][Gotham Gives]] and Google
are supporting our program by providing scholarships to pay the
tuition for qualified applicants.

Our first cohort graduated in May of 2021 and with that, New York City
(and state) had it's first 21 certified computer science
teacher. They'll be joined by 23 more two months from now. That's 44
teachers that have both the subject knowledge and the pedagogical
knowledge to match in the system. Part of their scholarship agreement
is for them to give back. Take part in CS education efforts in the
city so they're already helping to shape the community and culture of
K12 CS Education in New York.

I'm hoping for an even larger cohort this year. Imagine if we could
get 60 or more into our program this summer. That would mean in three
short years we'll have gone from zero to 100 qualified certified
teachers and we'll be well on the way to that critical mass of teacher
leaders.

As we get closer to that critical mass of qualified teachers, interest
in programs like my certificate program will wane but at the same
time, there will be more demand from teaching newcomers for our
Masters program as there will be a career path for young CS minded
teachers.

Once again it's the long game but that's what it takes. 

So, if you're a New York City CS teacher and are looking for state
certification, come join us. All the information can be found [[http://info.huntercs.org/teacher_ed/summer-2022.html][here]].
