---
title: Seats on a plane - addendum
date: 2021-11-02T07:15:47-04:00
tags: 
- ethics
- Ethical CS
categories:
- CS
draft: false
---

While my [[/post/airline-seats/][last post]] was well received, I did have a few conversations
where people asked why I did this with such a seemingly minor ethical
issue. They wondered that with issues the Facebook algorithm, bail and
sentencing algorithms, gerrymandering and other issues dominating the
ethical conversation, why focus this topic around something that seems
to affect far fewer people and might not even be such a big
deal. After all, when it does come up, flight crews can probably ask a
few people to shuffle seats and voila, problem solved.


The thing is, this was intentional and it was intentional on two
fronts.

First, who decides if an issue is major or minor? Our perceptions
change throughout our lives and through our experiences. Something
that might appear to be minor to us or minor right now could be major
to someone else. I remember my first week teaching at Seward Park HS
right after I left industry. Such an eye opener. Even though I went to
public schools and faced my share of challenges, I had no idea how
different my students lives were from mine. Things that might have
been a minor inconvenience to me were a brick wall to them. It's also
not enough to just view "slam dunk" issues through an ethical lens. We
have to indeed walk the walk. I wanted a mundane problem that may have
resulted from Innocent intent to illustrate that it's not about
teaching a lesson on the topic du jour but rather it's about
everything. 

I also wanted to pick a topic that wasn't right out there in the
mainstream. If I had them work on a recommendation system or some
other issue that's been all over the news these days, they would have
all guessed the punchline. I thought this would be low key enough so
that they'd discover the ethical issue by inadvertently creating it.

The other reason was that I wanted to keep the issue simple and
understandable. I already suspected that the code aspect would be a
challenge for some members of the class. I didn't want a super deep
ethical issue to cloud that side of the equation. A simple problem
kept everything clean. They first seated the customers, realized that
kids could be separated from parents, decided that this should be
addressed, then tried to address it. Keeping problem simple is a tried
and true teaching strategy. There's so much complexity in most ethical
issues and most programming problems and students can only cope with
so much at a time. This was an attempt to keep the load to a minimum.

As I said in the earlier post. I think the lesson needs tweaking -
particularly in order to make the coding level appropriate but I also
think it's a lesson worth keeping.

This past week, the class has been working with regular expressions. I
get to deliver the punchline to that one tomorrow evening.


