---
title: Alternate Representations
date: 2020-04-28T12:54:05-04:00
tags: 
- data structures
categories:
- data structures
draft: false
--- 

There was a comment on my last post about [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/arbitrary-trees/][arbitary trees]] on Reddit
talking about how this type of data structure was a hold over from the
old days when computer resources were more limited. Nowadays having a
list of children makes more sense. The comment was of course correct
but I still think it's worth teaching representations like the one I
spoke of in my [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/arbitrary-trees/][last post]]. 

Looking at interesting and different ways of representing data and
modeling solutions is one of the things that separates programmers or
coders from computer scientists and software engineers. I'm not
talking about commonly accepted definitions or advanced classwork or
theory and mathy stuff. I'm talking about how you approach a problem. 

To me, the coder or programmer is someone who has learned rudimentary
coding prowess but learned via rote example. This is typical of a code
school graduate or many self taught programmers. This is not to say
that people who learned this way are not computer scientists at heart
nor that they don't have the ability to think deeply about problems
but rather that their training was superficial - usually to get them
to market quickly. 

I know many people who started on their own following a book or mooc
or code school and grew beyond those basics but we've also seen many
"coders" who brute force using the same techniques regardless of
appropriateness. I can't tell you how many times I've seen an SQL
database used inappropriately as a flat file store or forcing
relationships when not optimal in something like MongoDB. 

We don't want our students to merely parrot the solution that we went
over in class. We want them to consider the problem at hand and all
the tools in their tool belt and come up with what makes sense. 

I like the arbitrary tree example as it uses the same internal
structure as a binary tree does: 

#+begin_src java
{{<highlight java>}}
  Class Node{
   private  data;
   private pointer1, pointer2;
   // other stuff omitted
   }
{{</highlight>}}
#+end_src

For a binary search tree pointer1 is left and pointer 2 is right. For
an arbitrary tree they represent first child and next sibling. The
same structure can also be used for a doubly linked list with previous
and next or a skip list. It's all about creatively using the tools at
hand. 

There are a number of lessons during which we can stretch our students
thinking in terms of data representations in our early classes. One is
when we can augment a data structure to avoid special cases. I wrote
about this when solving a maze or the [[https://cestlaz.github.io/posts/2014-02-26-change-the-data/][knight's tour]].

Those problems are also great place to talk about implicit data
structures. When we do our maze solver we talk about state space
search. The idea that there's this huge graph where each node is the
a potential state of the maze and the edges represent how we can move
from state to state:#alternate-representations.org#

{{<figure src="/img/mazestates.png">}}

The above graph can be considered an implicit data structure - it
never actually exists as a whole in our program. Our solver usually
uses a two dimensional array to represent a specific state of our
maze - that is, one node of the graph. We change the array as we make
and return from recursive calls. That recursion creates and destroys
nodes in our graph. At any point in time, each layer of stack in the
recursion holds one node in our graph with the top of the stack being
our current state but we never actually create or internally represent
the full graph. It's an ephemeral implicit data structure.

Finally, one very early opportunity to discuss these types of ideas
come when you use an array as a set of buckets where the index is the
value and the entry is the count. It's pretty simple but a very
different way of using an array or list when all you've seen is using
it to store actual items. I like doing this in the context of a
[[https://cestlaz.github.io/posts/2013-03-23-who_won_the_election-quadratic_to_linear_time/][frequency]] lesson.

In any event, it's sometimes worthwhile to look at solutions that may
no longer be optimal - they can be great triggers of both student
thought and discussion.





