---
title: Arbitrary Trees
date: 2020-04-27T18:45:50-04:00
tags: 
- data structures
- trees
- cs
categories: 
- data structures
draft: false
--- 

It's been 10 days from my last post. Not really a big break for me
historically but certainly a big one given how much I've been posting
this year. 

Been under the weather for the past couple of weeks dealing with
COVID-19. Haven't had super bad symptoms and as symptoms have been
getting fewer and less severe I'm hoping I'm close to a full recovery.

In any event, I'm feeling good enough for a quick post.

In my data structures class we've been working on binary trees. Most
of the unit is focused on [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search_tree][Binary Search Trees]]. They used to be a big
part of the B part of the old APCS-AB and are still a mainstay of
college CS2 classes. 

As usual, we covered all the basics. Creation, insertion, search,
traversal, and deletion. We discovered the run times and how a tree
structure can yield lgn behavior but can also degenerate to linear. We
also give a preview of more advanced data structures like red/back and
2-3 trees that address these issues (not to mention things like BTrees
and Splay trees).

One side topic I always like talking about during this unit though are
arbitrary trees. That is, trees where each node can have an arbitrary
number of children. Students usually start by creating nodes with an
array of children and then sometimes a linked list of children but I
like discussing something simpler. A tree where in each node you hold
two pointers - a pointer to the first child and a pointer to the next
sibling. I like this because internally it's the same as a binary
search tree where you also have two pointers in each node a left and a
right. Same "physical" representation but two very different
variations.

{{% figure class="z_image_center" src="/img/arbtree.png" %}}

The image on the left is the actual arbitrary tree and the one on the
right shows the internal representation.

In terms of applications, the file system is a
great example of an arbitrary tree. Another one that I like even more
is the DOM representation of a web page. That's nice because there are
Javascript functions to get the next sibling.

I put a short video together for my class. Here it is in case anyone
is interested. It's code agnostic so would be suitable for an APCS-A
class that also covers data structures.

<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/K1lR3ssgxLc" frameborder="0"
allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

 
