---
title: Do you need to know assembly to be a computer scientist?
date:  2022-01-19T06:47:18-04:00
tags:
- CSEd
- curriculum
categories:
- education
draft: false
--- 

Another recent discussion online asked "do you need to know assembly
language to be a computer scientist?"

Sides quickly formed. On one side, it was a strict requirement. Some
going so far as saying you *had* to start with it or at worst a
language like C. On the other side you had people claiming that it's
wholly unnecessary for most CS graduates like many of the classes we
require of a CS major (I'm looking at you Calc II and beyond).

I don't dispute that many people with CS degrees have great tech
careers and never program in assembly. Further, the idea that a low
level assembly programmer describes what a "computer scientist looks
like" or "should look like" is pretty off base.

On the other hand, I'd argue that a well educated computer scientist
should have some knowledge of low level concepts which can probably
best be explored through some exposure to assembly language.

To start, what is a computer scientist? As a field we still haven't
worked that one out. Certainly, people employed as professors in
computer science departments are pretty much, by definition, computer
scientists but that's the minority of CS majors.

To me, and this isn't really a great formal definition, a person who
employs the creative and problem solving techniques associated with
computer science in their day to day can certainly call themselves a
computer scientist.

It's a wishy washy definition, I know but to me, it works. Someone
employed as a software engineer *can* be a computer scientist or they
might not be. It depends on their job and how they approach it. Say
said SE is given screen descriptions, layouts and what to do when
events happen and they write code to implement this, they're not being
a computer scientist. Likewise, if they implement an algorithm
specifically given to them for a task. On the other hand, if the same
person designs the interface making creative decisions involving
accessibility and usability or solves a problem using or designing an
algorithm then implementing one, then they would be, in my view acting
as a computer scientist.

Of course, in the general sense a SE could be a real software
engineer, software architect, or many more things as well.

So, does a computer scientist *need* to actively know assembly?
No. That said, do they benefit from knowing something about it? I'd
say yes.

Years ago, I was watching a special with Itzhak Perlman, arguably the
greatest violinist of a generation and one of my favorites. He was
talking to and playing with a bunch of [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klezmer][klezmer]] musucians. Or rather, I
should say trying to play with. Klezmer is something of a Jewish jazz
with a lot of improvisation. Perlman understood this, could
meaningfully converse about it with the other musucians but he had the
hardest time trying to keep up with them. Nobody could seriously say
that Izhak Perlman wasn't and isn't a brilliant musician and artist
but he really couldn't play improvisational jazz. His training and art
are just in a different corner of the music world. That said, he was
certainly well versed in it. He knew jazz even though he didn't
perform it.

I also saw this at a Bobby Mcferrin concert. He was performing with a
small string orchestra. I think maybe it was Gidon Kremer's Kremerate
Baltica but I don't remember. At one point he was calling out the
individual orchestra members to do some improv. It did not go
well. Again, these were all clearly master artists and they certainly
knew and were comfortable with Jazz, just not performing it on the
fly.

In case you really want to see what I'm talking about, I'll give one
more example:

#+begin_export html


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6mRT61rRSGc?t=37" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</iframe>

#+end_export

 
Having some knowledge of assembly, or more specifically, how low level
things work is what I call a "latin" of CS. Understanding things like
memory or how a processor works help an individual understand buffer
overflows or why data types matter, why floating point calculations
are innacurate or why a hash table has to be sparse. They may never
program in assembly but some knowledge will make them a stronger
computer scientist. I would say the same for my other CS latin -
theory. They might not use it day to day but it will help shape their
decisions and make them a stronger software engineer or whatever.

So, can you be a gainfully employed tech person and never have seen
anything low level? Of course. Can you do computer science stuff and
say the same? Sure. But a well educated, well rounded computer
scientist will have had some exposure to low level concepts and have
some base level understanding.

