---
title: Busy Week
date: 2019-04-06T07:32:49-04:00
tags: 
- misc
categories: 
- misc
draft: false
--- 

I'm glad it's Saturday morning. It's been a busy week. It looks like
there's a couple more to plough through but hopefully then I can catch
my breath over spring break.

Why so busy? It's the same old story - you've got all those projects
that you're waiting on and everything comes in at the same time.

To start off, it's college decision season. The high school seniors
all know their options and are deciding where to go. While we're still
considering some applications to my Daedalus honors CS program, most
of the offers have gone out or will go out within a couple of days.

I started the week with an info session about the program. eBay was
nice enough to host. I've held this session there now for the past
three years. First time, I had about 20 attendees and am not sure if
it made a difference in any high school senior's decision. Last year
we had about 40 in the room but this year we reached capacity
at 65. Each senior was allowed to brign a +1. Some didn't, many
brought a parent but a few brought a friend. At the end of the
session, most of the friends sought me out and asked if it was too
late to apply. I told them where to fill everything out but
unfortunately I didn't know if I would be allowed to consider them or
not. 

I also had about 10 of my current students at the event. This was the
first time I was able to have that many. First time, I only had a
handful in the program and last year we first had to reschedule due to
weather and most of my students had class on the rain date. Having a
bunch of current students there to mix and talk with the applicants
was proabably the most important part of the evening. 

At the end, the high schoolers had left and the students and I were
BSing along with Paul, our host when Paul offered a tour and then went
into an impromptu tech talk with the kids. I really
wanted to get home to bed but the kids were loving it so I let it
ride.

All in all it was a great night for my current students and I'm hoping
also for the high schoolers but it was a draining way to start the
week.

We also had a big CUNY2X event last week on Thursday evening. Around
50 students interviewing with fifteen or so companies for summer
internships. We've had this event three semesters in a row now. It's a
long evening but at the end of the day lots of students get both
interviewing experience as well as offers. 

Things also started to move this past week on our CS Education
programs but not in a good way. Rather than approving our programs
they came back with a bunch of questions. It's rather frustrating
since we cover everything they want and then some but they don't seem
to be seeing it. For example, we've got a big chunk of our topics
course where we'll essentially cover full stack development light and
we cover way in excess of anything in NY's forthcoming standards on
networks and systems not to mention things like cybersecurity,
accessibility, UX and more in that unit but the state said they don't see
any evidence to that effect. So I had too start to take our syllabi and bloat
them with excruciating detail. Something I'll be doing over the
weekend and into next week.

To add to the week I had to pack. I've been pushing for an office move
for about two years. When I came to Hunter they placed me physically
in the Ed school. It made sense - I'm officially appointed there but
I've done most of my work so far with CS. Even when my CSED programs
start, many of the students will be grad students or working teachers
so they won't be on campus much except for when they teach. On the
other hand the CS undergrads are around all the time. Well, Monday I'm
moving to a new office right by the all the CS action. 

It's also been a busy semester for my course planning. I'm teaching
data structures at Hunter for the first time. I've taught it many
times before but that was to a known audience with a different
toolset - Java instead of C++. To be honest, I'm not particularly
happy with how I've been doing. I don't think I've been terrible but
I've left plenty of classes feeling I've missed my marks. I know
that it's something I'll have figured out and next time around I'll be
back up to speed but it's made planning and reflection more of a time
sink and it always bothers me when I don't feel my students are
getting my best.

So, it's been a busy week in a busy semester. For the most part, good
things happening but I'm really looking forward to spring break.

