---
title: Certified CS teachers - 2 flags in NY
date: 2022-09-28T16:39:37-04:00
tags:
- certification
- CS Education
categories:
- CS Education
draft: false
--- 


I've been running Hunter's teacher certification program now for three
years. We started with our Advanced Certificate which allows currently
working teachers to earn an additional cert in CS and soon a few
masters students joined the pipeline.

In three years we've made great progress. Approximately 45 New York
City teachers are either state certified to teach CS or are qualified
to recieve the certification once they file with the state. We've got
close to 60 more joining them this spring. That's really exciting as
it gets us to the critical mass I think the city needs moving
forward.

A core of knowledgeable teachers to provide an existing
community of professionals as new young CS teachers join the
profession over the next few years.

This work something I'm both proud and excited about but there are two
major concerns.

First, there are many teachers teaching CS in NY that have no
intention of earning the new certification and also don't really know
the subject. 

Second, this is only New York City and NY is a big state and not
enough is happening in other parts of the state.

I'll talk about the first issue in my next post but for now, let's
talk about the state.

A big thing I'm excited about with my current cohort of teachers is
that five of them are from the Finger Lakes region of NY. About a year
ago, I was essentially cold called by educators from the Dryden school
district. They wanted to make sure they had knowledgeable CS teachers
and saw that we had an advanced certificate program. They wanted to
send their teachers to us for certification. There were issues - for
funding, they ended up applying and receiving an NSF grant and on my
end, I had to make sure that our program would remain remote - that
commute from the Finger Lakes would've been brutal. When all was said and
done, we started this past summer with over 50 teachers and teacher
candidates from New York City and 5 from Dryden and neighboring
Groton. Those five teachers have been a terrific addition to the
cohort and I think it's also worked for them - they immediately become
a local network of CS teachers as opposed to being the only one in
town and they've also tapped into the New York City network we've been
building.

This means we've planted 2 flags in NY State - two locations that have
or will soon have certified CS teachers. The ones that have finished
my program in NYC along with the five from Dryden and Groton.

The trouble is, we need more.

Right now, there are 5 institutions with register masters program in
New York State and 3 wither registered bachelors programs. I can't
vouch for the quality of any programs other than mine and I don't know
how many are active.

Regardless, the issue here is that these are all programs that provide
initial certification - they're for new people entering the
profession. These programs are needed but will ramp up slowly across
the state. At Hunter we've had registrations of 2, 4, and now most
recently 5.

We need more Advanced Certificate programs across the
state. Programs that allow current CS teachers to learn this new field
so they can teach it legally and teach it well. Right now, Hunter's
the only game in town. This is one of the reasons why I've fought
to keep us online - you can't expect teachers from way out in queens
to come into the heart of Manhattan after a school day for classes and
then back out LI or wherever they live let alone teachers from 4 hours
north of the city.

We need more Advanced Certification programs and we need ways to fund
the teachers who need these programs. I've been extremely fortunate
that organizations like Gotham Gives and Google support our work in
New York City but I'm thinking we need the equivalent up the Hudson
Valley, across the Erie Canal and all the way to Buffalo.

These programs and the related funding also wouldn't have to last
forever. After there years of intense work, NYC will have its core of
certified teachers and I expect the demand for my advanced cert
program to go way down while we slowly see an uptick in interest in
our Masters program.

Next time, I'll talk about that other issue - the fact that we're
going to have a lot of teachers that don't really know CS and how to
teach it for a long time but this is enough for now.

We need more programs across the state that will recertify current
teachers and really set them up as CS teachers. I've done what I could
in that regard at Hunter and am very proud of our partnership with
Dryden and Groton but it's got to be more than Hunter college.

So, hey, if you're somewhere outside of the city and this is important
to you - drop me a line, I'd love to work together to make things
happen across the state.


