---
title: Teaching with chatGPT - The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly
date: 2023-01-15T11:03:52-04:00
tags:
- ai
- chatGPT
categories:
- teaching
draft: false
--- 

The plan was to talk about what we can and should do in CS classes
with respect to chatGPT type technologies but after seeing so much
discussion on how to and not to use chatGPT I thought I'd insert this
additional post on classroom use.

We already talked about [[https://cestlaz.github.io/po%60st/teachgpt/][the good]]. I love the idea of making an essay
with errors for proof reading and it can be a great search resource,
albeit one that needs to be error checked and I'm sure many other
productive teaching and teaching support applications will turn up.

We also talked about [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/cheatgpt/][the bad]]. The big one being potential cheating -
crossing the line from research or understanding aid to using it as an
inappropriate shortcut. It also just plain out fails at times to do
what you wnat it to do but that's really reasonable given what it is.

What about the ugly?

Ugly is probably the wrong word. I'm talking about using chatGPT or
any technology because it's new and cool and not because it's actually
the right tool in the right place at the right time.

This is nothing new and not restricted to education. Years ago, my
parent's taxes were audited. The auditor has one of those new fangled
electronic calculators and he was so enthralled  with it that he kept
showing it off and all it could to do my parents throughout the
audit. My parents were pretty sharp overall and my dad was very good
with numbers. At the end of the day the auditor determined that my
parents didn't owe taxes but actually were due a sizable refund. When
all was said and done, my dad pointed out all the times that the
auditor messed up with the calculator which resulted in the
refund. The truth was that the taxes were filed correctly to begin
with but my folks weren't going to turn away free money. The auditor
should have just gone old school.

I've seen some examples already of "the ugly" and I'm sure there will be
more to come. Also, I want to emphasize that "the ugly" doesn't
necessarily mean bad,  I just wanted to use that turn of phrase.

A friend of mine suggested using chatGPT to evaluate  essays for when
students aren't comfortable with other people viewing their
work. Assuming that we're confident that chatGPT will do a good job
this could work but I'd have some concerns. True, this could alleviate
a student's fear of peer grading but building a supportive community
of peers that *can* support you is important and I'm leery of using
technology too much as a crutch. Also that while this might offload
work from the teacher, it also removes an opportunity for the teacher
to build more of a relationship with the student through the
interaction and through their work.

I'm not enough of an expert on language/english classes to really
judget that bt here's a similar CS related example that I saw
suggested online. Have students enter programs in into chatGPT and ask
the system to add comments. 

I tried this with a couple of small intro type programs and each time
I got the same style of comments. Things like a comment on top of a
loop saying "loop from 1 to n" or on top of a line like ~sum = 0~
saying "initialize the sum  to 0." Not good comments at all.

This, I'd describe as ugly. If chatGPT consistently gives these types
of comments then it's pretty worthless as an activity if the goal is
to help students understand commenting and writing good code. On the
other hand, if chatGPT sometimes gives these ridiculous comments and
at other times gives good comments, well, that's pretty bad as well.

Now, if it always gives bad answers it could be a fun activity. Solve
the problem in class, have chatGPT comment it, and then you can
discuss good and bad coding styles and the limits of programs like
chatGPT.

Generating lessons plans also counts to me as ugly, unless you use it
to add standards to your plans to fulfill requirements from
above. Yeah, it's cool that this program can make a bare bones bullet
point lesson but you then have to read it, evaluate it, check it for
errors and then still add all the meat to the bones and customize it
for your students. I'd argue that if a teacher knows their stuff it'll
slow them down.

Normally, when using a new technology an educator should ask
themselves if it saves time and/or effort and does it improve
instruction/learning and make sure that there's some real benefit to
the use. It's fine if that benefit comes later and requires some dues
to be paid now but if it's just a cool new technology, the new shiny
if you would, I'll pass.

As a final note, even when the ugly doesn't save time or improve
instruction it's not necessarily bad. A good teacher knows when a
class needs a break and also when they themselves need one. It's fine
to burn some time on a fun but not productive activity either for
mental health, community building or other positive reasons. It's not
healthy to be 100% on task 100% of the time and a good teacher gets
this. What's important to also understand is when a new technology or
tool can be used productively and when it's just a diversion.


