---
title: Cheating
date: 2023-01-03T14:30:36-04:00
tags:
- teaching
- cheating
categories:
- teaching 
draft: false
--- 

I said in my last post that I wanted to write about chatGPT. The way I
see it, chatGPT is affecting teachers in four areas. First, students
using it to cheat, second the possibility of students using it as a
constructive tool. Third, teachers using it as a resource for lesson
planning or similar, and fourth, down the road, another tool to
replace teachers.

Before I dive into any of those, I thought I'd spend a post talking
about cheating in general. I've written about cheating [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/cheating-on-projects/][before]] but
that was a few years ago so I thought I'd revisit things in light of
chatGPT and other resources students can use to cut corners.

Cheating has always been a big topic in education. Some teachers let
it slide, some are hardliners but it's a front and center topic. It's
also a topic that's difficult to address. One reason is that our
society tolerates and even celebrates cheating at many levels. Time
and again we see that the rules are only for the little people. Not a
great basis if you want to encourage rule following in the classroom.

In my opinion, cheating is going to happen and usually it's not worth
stressing about but more on that later.

Why do student cheat?

Some cheat because they don't care about the class and find it as an
easy way out but I'd like to think that most students don't follow
this path. Many cheaters do it out of desperation - they *need* to get
a good grade because of their parents, college applications,
expectations or otherwise. The system they're in dictates that it is
unacceptable to get a low grade and so they're backed into a
corner. Similarly, students are at times so overburdened that they
can't complete all the work or adequately prepare for assessments -
this can also lead to cheating.

Another case is that students in some cultures view what some would
call cheating as collaboration and this one can be tricky as to a many
people it's a matter of degree and in my opinion, collaboration should
be encouraged.


I do have to admit that there is another category that I played a part
in back in high school - in my group, if we respected a teacher, we
never cheated - we'd just take our lumps. If we didn't we might cheat,
usually to see how far we could go and what we could get away with -
in all cases, to be honest, we worked hard to learn the material and
the cheating part was just a game - not so much trying to get answers
we needed on tests but more, can we communicate information undetected
during an exam.

So, what do we do?

Some teachers take a hard line but I'm not comfortable with
this. Repercussions for cheating are harsh and can range from a slap
on the wrist which isn't worth it to failing a course or even
expulsion. Those last two are pretty big and I've known in my life a
number of people who were falsely accused of academic dishonesty. I'd
rather miss a few of the cheats rather than punish the innocent.

I usually will let it slide unless I know 100%. I'll take certain
measures to limit cheating as outlined in my earlier linked post but
more of my efforts are to create a positive environment - encourage
collaboration with attribution - try not to overburden students with
gratuitous work - make it okay to "fail" so long as you eventually get
to where you need to go and so on. Of course, it's not perfect. I'm
still in a system that gives letter or number grades and everything
has to settle down to a grade by end of term. I'd like to think that
the culture I push minimizes cheating but you can't really know.

In any event, there really is some truth the old line "you're only
cheating yourself." At least in CS. If a student cheats through a
class, they'll likely not take the next one. So what, they got one
undeserved A grade. In the greater scheme of things it's not going to
make a difference. If they don't learn the material, they're not going
to get the job and even if they do, they won't be able to do the job
and, well, if they can do the job, then maybe what they cheated on
wasn't so important after all.

Now, it's true that we do have to try to minimize cheating - hopefully
by creating a positive culture because the majority of students DO
have to learn the basics and we can't have everyone cheating through
everything but I really don't think that's an issue. For me, it's try
to make the environment conducive to not cheating and then not worry
about it too much.

One last note is that while I try to do this, I do get irked when a
student cheats and I really get irked when students try to "work the
system" to get grades they don't deserve. I try to remind myself that,
as the saying goes "it's not personal, it's just business" and I think
that's a good thing for all of us to remember. To fix this, we have to
fix root causes and while movements like ungrading, if not taken to
far, can really help, I'm not sure that things will improve much in
the short term.

With all this said, stay tuned for related thoughts on chatGPT.





