---
title: Classes Or After school programs - which is more important for female retention in CS?
date: 2019-10-14T21:47:18-04:00
tags: 
- APCS-A
- CS Education
categories: 
- APCS-A
draft: false
--- 


This morning Mark Guzdial tweeted on his latest post:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Results from
Longitudinal Study of Female Persistence in CS: AP CS matters,
After-school programs and Internships do not <a
href="https://t.co/GOzp3045Hp">https://t.co/GOzp3045Hp</a></p>&mdash;
Mark Guzdial (@guzdial) <a
href="https://twitter.com/guzdial/status/1183699009766121473?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">October
14, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"
charset="utf-8"></script> 


I'm glad Mark wrote about this as it's something that's important to
both research and publicize but it's really not a surprise.

I'm going to start by dismissing the statement that "... participation in
the Aspirations awards program were teh best predictors of persistence
three years after the high school survey in both CS and other
technology-related majors." To me, that's a water is wet statement -
girls who apply for an award where they talk about their aspiriations
in computing are more likely to do more computing. 

The other stuff merits more of a look. Classes and APCS-A in
particular vs after school programs. Since APCS-A is as far as I know
always an elective there's probably some selection bias here. If a
girl elects to take a college level CS class, perhaps there's already
some interest in pursuing CS in college. Further, and I really hate to
say this, given the male dominated aspects frequently present in our
CS classes, a girl who was interested in CS and survives APCS-A might
be more likely to continue on and succeed having weathered the storm. 

Now let's look at the out of school programs. There are a number of
issues here. Many don't really cover CS or legit programming, many
allow one group member to basically carry the team, and many are
really entrepreneurship programs using the CS marketing hype. They
don't really prepare students for what's to come in CS. When a
student then takes a CS class in college they're ill prepared and drop
the subject. I've seen it happen. Unfortunately, many of those after
school programs are masters of marketing and fundraising. Some get big
money from the Googles of the world but they're never held accountable
for preparing kids to fail. Rather, they're lauded and praised as
saviors of education. 

Going further, after school programs are usually taught by volunteers,
not teachers. They don't necessarily understand the nuances of
teaching and they don't necessarily prepare you for your next CS
experience. You then end up in a college course of 300, are ill
prepared to succeed, fall through the cracks and drop out. Take APCS-A
in HS and you're going to be in a class of 30 and in a much more
supportive, forgiving  environment. A much better place to prepare you
for what's to come.

All in all the idea that girls are more likely to follow a CS path
with a solid high school experience than with an outside club or
activity is hardly a surprise. What is more of a surprise to me is the
fact that it's taken so long to start getting the word out.





