---
title: Hunter College Winter Codefest 2019
date: 2019-02-20T17:34:00-04:00
tags: 
categories: 
draft: true
--- 

It's great to see how much Hunter CS has developed since starting here
there years ago. The latest endeavor is Winter Codefest. During the
fall I was approached by one of my students who had asked an older
Hunter CS student about their portfolio and found that the senior's
portfolio was lacking. This student said we should do something to
help encourage younger students to build that portfolio. 

The result was Winter Codefest. A team of organizers was formed and
they came up with the plan. Have students register teams right after
Fall finals and have teams work on independent projects over the
course of January before the Spring semester started. We'd then have an
event where everyone would show off their work. We decided to limit
participants to my Daedalus scholars this time around but planned from
the get go to make it Hunter wide in the future.

We ended up with about 24 participants spanning all three Daedalus
cohorts with most of the participants in the second year group. 

Due to the scheduling we couldn't hold the end of competition event
until today. A bunch of us gathered along with some of our friends
from the tech community to review the projects, network, and generally
talk tech. All in all the event was a real success. All the
participants learned new  technologies and now have one more show
piece to talk about in interviews.

This year was unquestionably a success and it's going to be a bigger
one next year. The CS department is working on creating 1 and 2 credit
projects courses that will be offered during the winter session. This
will enable students to take the courses to develop a Winterfest
project with the support of a class around it. We're also going to
make the event available to all Hunter CS students. 

It's really exciting to be part of developing programs like Hunter
College CS, Programs that can be super transformative for young New
Yorkers. It's even more exciting when your students take active
leadership roles and help make our programs even more special.


