---
title: "CS vs CT vs Coding"
date: 2018-09-28T12:08:35-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- csed
- pedagogy
categories:
- CSed
---


There's been a lot of buzz recently concernting Computational Thinking
(CT) vs Computer Science (CS) vs Coding / Programming on the
interwebs.

Some of the questions and concerns that I've seen recently include:
- What is CT??
- Will rich schools get CS and poor only CT?
- Will rich schools get CS and poor on coding?

The first question is a big one and as a community we haven't answered
it yet. I think about it as including things like algorithmic
thinking, decomposing problems, iterating, pattern recoginition and the like 
but I'm hardpressed to come up with a succinct formal definition. This
is somewhat related to the bigger problem of "what is CS?" A problem
the CS community is still dealing with. There seems to be an editorial
or letter in the [[https://cacm.acm.org/][Communications of the ACM]] every few months talking
about this. "We're an enginering discipline. No, we're a science. No
we're an artistic endeavor" and on and on. It's no surprise that the
rest of the world doesn't understand what we are when we haven't
figured it out ourselves. It's also no surprise that this problem also
extends to CT.

One thing seemed clear on the twitter threads and posts I read is that
people seem to believe that CT and Coding are potentially overlapping
subsets of CS but you can do CT and Coding without CS.

While there's probably a lot to say on the CT without CS or rather CT
without programming but today let's look at the programming without CS
side of things.

This is probably of particular concern to me as a high school and now
college guy. There's no doubt to me that there's a big difference
between a kid learning coding/programming and computer science. 

Coding can be a useful skill but without at least some computer
science it's of limited value. Look at code schools as examples. Many
code schools work to prepare their customers for entry level tech
jobs. Usually, this includes the fundamentals of programming on top of
a typical business toolset. Examples would be a node.js backend,
Mongodb, and React.js. Another, albeit older one so probably not
taught as much now would be Ruby on Rails. Upon completing the
program, one can create a formulaic full stack applicationand knowing
that formula can make you employable in our current tech sector. The
downside though, as I've heard from countless employers, is that code
school graduates, by training, can't break out of that formula. They
just don't have the context, nor the problem solving ability - they
lack the CS. I'm sure many go on to learn the CS but that's another
story. I was talking to a code school founder a few years ago about
this and asked "what happens when the formula chages." The answer I
got was "that's ok, we'll just bring them back for a new bootcamp." Of
course that will cost the kid another 10K or whatever bootcamps are
charging these days.

Now of course some code schools try harder than others and some
attempt build some CS into their programs but while there are always
outliers who can learn a great deal in a short period of time, and
often on their own, real education takes time and effort and a short
term bootcamp just doesn't have that time.

Back to schools.

To start coding is easier to teach than CS. It can be formulaic and
there are lots of resources out there to assist teachers without a CS
background. 

It's also easy to test and show off. 

I was at the NYTM once and they were celebrating a code school
project. The idea was really a good one - automatic sensing of heat in
low income apartments. I had a couple of questions about getting their
data out to the authorities but thought that if they figured that out
it could really do some good. On the other hand there was practically
no CS. As the project was described - it sets up it's own mesh network
and communicates heat readings etc etc., I said to my neighbor in the
audience - sounds like an arduino with an XBee shield and yep, when
they showed the case, it was the exact form factor to hold an arduino
and xbee. That told me there was no CS. The mesh networking is
automatically done by the XBee so all they had to do was take the
sample arduino code to read the heat sensor and instead of sending it
to the serial port as the sample code does, send it to a particular
XBee node. Pretty much no CS and almost no programming. Just a great
idea and gluing some components together.

I've seen the same with student projects that have been highlighted at
events with funders and politicians and in the media. I won't describe
them as they are student projects and wouldn't do that to a student
but the projects really had no CS under the hood. Nice ideas or even
more importantly nice stories around the kid but it was glue and
simple basic programming not CS.

Teaching real CS is harder to do, harder to assess and harder to show
off which makes teaching coding so enticing. 

This is not to say that teaching coding without CS doesn't have
value. I believe it does but it also leads to another problem -- it
can be assessed improperly either with showy projects that are merely
gluing a theme on a fixed pattern or by tests that allow for
memorization and this at times has led to students being given too
much too early.

We've seen this with algebra and physics. Students end up taking these
subjects before they're ready for them. They can pass the
standardized test  because they can plug numbers into formulas or can
recognize what form to use because there are a limited set of problem
patterns on the exams but they don't really "get" the subject. This
leads to problems later on but of course that's another teacher's
problem.

This also happens in coding classes. While it's usually pretty clear
when a kid isn't getting a CS concept, I've seen programming
experiences where the student at first or in the short term can appear
to pass the assessments but later on it's revealed that they weren't
ready and they didn't really learn what they were supposed to.

This is a problem. Just as we might have some students exposed to CT
without CS I think a major problem will be kids getting Coding without
CS. This will particularly be a danger in poorer schools and
communities but possibly across the board.

Just another thing we have to really be on guard for as we try to
achieve CS for all.






