---
title: Deadlines And Commitments
date: 2020-10-01T13:50:38-04:00
tags:
- teaching
categories:
- teaching 
draft: false
--- 

A few days ago I was part of a Twitter discussion on assignment
deadlines. I noticed a tweet:

#+begin_export html
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Not sure who needs to hear this, but stop taking off points for late assignments. Itâ€™s not helping students learn responsibility, and itâ€™s not making your job easier. Itâ€™s only making your class inequitable. ðŸ’¯</p>&mdash; Sydney Jensen (@sydneycjensen) <a href="https://twitter.com/sydneycjensen/status/1309946435056611335?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 26, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 
#+end_export

I disagreed. I wasn't necessarily against floating or open deadlines
without deductions but rather, they made my life more difficult and
weren't in the best interest of my students. That said, they could
very well be appropriate for Sydney and her's.

Today I saw some emails on the SIGCSE list on the same topic. One
caught my eye - the poster talked about giving extra credit for early
submissions. These were likely unrelated discussions since the twitter
participants were not CS educators and I think the SIGCSE discussion
was mostly of college level CS instructors.

In any event, it was a sign. I was meant to write a blog post on it.

To start, what's my policy?

For homework or small every day assignments I grade for attempt, not
correctness. You either made an honest effort or you didn't. I
encourage students to help each other but ask they cite where and when
they got help. When all is said and done, if you've done most of the
homework you get the full homework percent of the grade. If you miss
one here or there, no big deal. If you miss a whole bunch, you've got
a problem. 

For projects, I have hard deadlines with a deduction for lateness. If
time and circumstance permits, I'll give a project and we'll have a
discussion and set the due date together. Also, if a student talks to
me ahead of time about some issue, I'll almost always give a penalty
free extension. On the other hand, if they come to me last minute, I
usually won't.

When I grade, and I *hate* grading, I get into a groove so grading a
project later does inconvenience me and it's also not doing the
student any favors - we've moved on to the next set of topics but I
don't have the project which is an assessment of how the student was
doing up to that point.

Is this bad? I don't think so. While many deadlines are arbitrary,
students do have to learn to get things done and as long as the
deadline is reasonable there shouldn't be a problem. Since I'm
flexible if a student has a particular issue even more so. One
tweet on the thread said that since some students aren't comfortable
asking a teacher for an extension it was unfair but I think you have
to draw the line somewhere. One students might not ask for an
extension and just be late and another might not ask and kill
themselves to meet the deadline but in either case, I don't think it's
unreasonable to expect the student to advocate for themselves
particularly when they can start the conversation either in person or
via email and in private. 

On the other hand, is having open deadlines all good? Probably
not. Some students will game and abuse the system. Not all, but
certainly some and those students will gain an advantage in terms of
grades. Now, in an ideal world. we wouldn't care about grades but in
the current reality if student one gets a fair B+ while student two
exploits loose deadlines nad gets an A-, guess who's more likely to
get into that selective college? There's also the problem of
snowballing and falling behind. If a student is a week late on
something that reinforces or clarifies the next topic that student is
now falling behind on that next topic.

We also have the final looming deadline of end of semester or end of
year which further complicates matters. 

So, who's right? Who knows. Overall, I think what I do works for me
and my classes. It's a system that's evolved over three decades and
will continue to evolve. Every year is a potential tweak and every new
situation, like when I came over to Hunter was cause for
re-evaluation. On the other hand, I know teachers who have open
deadlines and it seems to work for them and their students so they
should keep on keeping on. 

What about that extra credit for early projects? This is one that
sounds good but I don't like it. I think this one is potentially
really inequitable. It sounds good until you remember that students
all have different schedules and different obligations. If you give
students one week to complete an assignment starting monday, even if
they all have roughly the same workload, it will be distributed in
different ways.

One kid might front load their courses into Mon-Wed so they don't have
to commute Thursday and Friday. That student will never be able to
finish an assignment early because they've left there homework time
for later in the week. Same thing for a kid who works evenings rather
than weekends. There will be other kids where their schedule favors
finishing early. This sounds like a great idea but it will really only
favor a select few and not necessarily because they're doing things
"the right way." 

So, what's the answer on due dates? As usual we get a resouding "it
depends." I just gave an assignment last Monday and over Zulip we
collectively decided that a fair deadline would be a week from
today. I don't expect any extensions will be needed but if I'm
approached I'll probably be flexible as I've always been. My policy
seems to be working well so I'm sticking to it for now. If yours works
for you, do the same.
