---
title: But we don't have enough teachers!!
date: 2021-06-14T07:55:01-04:00
tags:
- CS Ed
- Teacher Prep
categories:
- CS Ed
draft: false
--- 

A common refrain against requiring CS in our K12 schools is that we
don't have the teachers and we won't any time soon. Sure, we don't
right now but we won't if we don't do something about it.


#+begin_export html
<img width="300" src="https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/16/71/5c/16715cc71bd6c28da0b32f24afec5045--simpsons-quotes-los-simpsons.jpg">
#+end_export

The question to ask is "how long will it take" and "how do we get
there?"

Let's look at New York City. We've got approximately 1,000,000
students in our public schools. Let's say that's grades 1
to 12. That's 8333 per grade. Let's take one particular grade and see
how many classes. At 34 students per class we get 2450 classes. Since
teachers typically teach five classes that means to cover 1 class for
every student in one particular grade we'll need about 500 teachers to
cover a full year class. 250 if the class is only one semester. 


This if, of course, just back of the envelope calculating and we'd
need a good deal more to really do justice to teaching CS in K12 but
500 sounds like a reasonable critical mass to say "we're teaching CS."

How long until we can get there?

At Hunter we started our advanced certificate program a year
ago. The cert program is specifically for teachers licensed in another
area seeking to add the New York State CS credential. Our first cohort
graduated 21 and I can proudly say they're all very well prepared to
teach CS in K12. They know their content and how to teach it. We're
starting another batch in two weeks and a third cohort next summer. By
June 2023 we should have between 60 and 100 teachers certified. That's
not bad. We'll have a core group of teacher leaders three years from
our start. 

How are we doing this? What's the incentive for current teachers to
get this new certification? It's an opportunity to really learn some
CS and how to teach it. All the training and PD based models just
don't cut it long term. On the other hand, it costs a pretty penny -
21 graduate credits. True, those credits can be applied to salary
differentials but still. Also, while the state could just flat out
require the certification but they've put in a generous ramp up -
teachers will need the credential but not for a few year.

The biggest reason we've been able to get these teachers in is the
generosity of the New York Tech community. We've been able to provide
financial support to these teachers looking to be our leaders moving
forward. 

Going with that, we have 4 students currently in our Masters program
with another 6 or so slated to start in the Fall and that's with zero
advertising and outreach. I expect that in a couple of years, the
demand for the certificate program will wane while it accelerates for
the masters program. 

We're not going to have all the teachers we need in three years or
even in five but in three we'll have a solid core. As other
certification programs come online the city will increase it's teacher
training capacity and as we close in on 2026 when CS4All will expect
all schools to offer CS, we'll have a good number of qualified
teachers to fill the need.

Sure, it'll take a decade or longer to finish the job but you've got
to start with a plan and a vision and lots of support. At least in NYC
we've got all three.





