---
title: First Day Final Semester
date: 2023-01-27T09:49:07-04:00
tags:
- teaching
categories:
- teaching
draft: false
--- 

So, yesterday was the first day of the semester. Since I'm retiring,
it's my last first day at Hunter.

Felt pretty good. I think knowing that I'll get a break after the term
has alleviated some of the burnout for now.

What will I be focusing on in class this last time around?

I'm teaching three classes.

First up is my undergraduate data structures. To be honest, I'm not
looking at anything special there - just business as usual. I enjoyed
working with this group last semester in their CS1 class so this is
just a continuation. I'll try to bring the usual extras I bring to DS
classes - interesting applications of the data structures and
algorithms and work on prepping for the technical interview but I
don't think I'll be paying attention to anything different than any
other semester.

My CS1 recitation though, is going to take more thought. Of the three
undergraduate classes I cycle through, CS0 in Python, this CS1
lab/recitation, and Data Structures, this class is the one where I
have and exercise the most freedom. I do a good deal of work with the
class on practical programming and software engineering as well as
looking at some more advanced topics than the regular
sections. Passing off my data structures class to the "next guy" will
be pretty straightforward but this class has been customized enough
that I have to really thin about and document what should be kept
regardless of the new instructor and what's really extraneous. 

We can probably drop the CS extras I do - as much as I like them, the
truth is that another CS instructor might prefer other advanced
topics.

The Software Engineering stuff, though, I think I've been doing
particularly well and should probably be kept as is. I've really got
to document all of this and prepare for the hand off.

My third class is a topics class for the Masters students and working
teachers in my certification program. That should be fun. Last year, I
enjoyed all the student presentations and got some great new ideas
should I teach any of the topics in the future. this time around
should be the same.

The thing I have to focus on is that I have to make sure to document
the aspects of the class that will potentially be tested on the
forthcoming CST. That's the states Content Specialty Test. This group
will probably be exempt since they'll finish off before the exam is
released but future cohorts will have to sit for the exam in order to
earn their state CS certification. I'll have to document all the
little annoying things that could be on the exam for future reference
so that the next person running the program makes sure they're all
covered when next this class runs.

So that's pretty much it.

First week down and twelve more to go.




