---
title: Hunters first Honors CS Cohort
date: 2020-05-19T07:41:29-04:00
tags: 
- Hunter
categories: 
- Hunter
draft: true
--- 

Almost four and a half years ago I left Stuyvesant and joined Hunter
College. One of the initiatives I was charged with was the creation of
a computer science honors program - the Daedalus scholars. Now, a
little over four years later, our first cohort is graduating.

I'm super proud of that first cohort and what we've collectively been
building. 

I joined Hunter at the end of January 2016 - a month after college
applications had closed. This meant that we had to build our first
cohort after the fact. Nobody applied to Hunter to be a part of the
Daedalus scholars because we didn't exist. 

Still, by looking at the students who had already applied to Hunter we
found a few that were interested and qualified. We lost a few along
the way - a student who really wanted an engineering program, one who
had already conditionally been accepted to another school but took our
money for the semester (I really hate it when people exploit a system
like this but that's another story), one who really didn't know what
CS was and ended up not liking the subject, and one who really wanted
to leave the city. 

During our first semester, some Macaulay students found out about our
program and wanted to join so we padded our numbers with a small
number of them. Overall we ended up with a small group of 12.

As I said, I'm proud of all of them for what they did at Hunter and
for what lies ahead.

Now, four years later we get hundreds of applicants including a
growing number from outside the city and are taking in many more great
students. I don't know the other colleges that our first cohort
members were accepted to but now we're competing for students with
Stony Brook, NYU, RIT, and in some cases bigger "names." My goal was
for us to become the best value CS and the best CS in NYC and we're
well on our way. with the first cohort, we prototyped some activities
and events that have evolved into staples - tech mentoring, codefest,
interview prep and more. 

Our first cohort led the way and I'm super proud of them. Now they'll
become our first graduates and continue to be resource for both each
other and future Hunter CS students. This is now the start of another
endeavor - it took decades to create the StuyCS Mafia and now I get to
repeat the process with HunterCS  but this time, since I know what's
to come I can enjoy the show as it unfolds.

