---
title: Things they remember that we forgot 
date: 2022-12-17T06:43:31-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc 
draft: false
--- 

Some time ago I wrote about some of the things our students remember
([[https://cestlaz.github.io/oldblog/blight-move/][link]] - sorry for the bad formatting). Lessons, concepts, stories, or
even small jokes I remember telling but had no idea that they left a
lasting impression on any students.

Fast forward to yesterday. I spent some time yesterday at a friend, a
former student's company for their holiday get together. My friend was
telling a story about how I helped get him started - I won't get into
details but while I do remember the overall impression of including
and encouraging him, I don't remember the detailed specifics. Another
sign of getting old. 

It made me think of not only the things they remember that we remember
but also what most surely be many things that as older teachers we no
longer remember yet may have stuck with our students.

I've spoken to former students a few times and they'd tell me about
something they'll "always remember" and usually it's a pretty cool but
ultimately, just a small CS technique or work approach fact. Other
times, like the story that was told yesterday, it's a reminder that at
times we can have a tremendous positive impact and sometimes we don't
have to do much more than be decent human beings. Over the last few
years, I've been told a few times by older alums, just as a throwaway
comment how I created a "safe place" for them. Funny, I may have done
that by some throwaway comment or action by me and it meant a lot to
them. Now yeas later, I'm the one who's greatly moved by their
throwaway comments.

Unfortunately, there are probably things I've inadvertently said or
done in my career that have adversely affected some students but for
better or worse, we rarely get feedback on that.

It goes to show the tremendous impact teachers can have even with
small gestures. 

Even the good stuff, many teachers never hear about it. This is one
area that I feel both truly fortunate and humbled. Being in touch with
so many former students and with so many now friends, I've been given
the gift of hearing and seeing what I've done. I can't say why, but I
think those of us who teach CS seem to get this opportunity more than
other teachers, even when our students go into totally unrelated
fields.

I think about my old teacher, mentor, and friend [[https://cestlaz.github.io/posts/2012-05-09-my-favorite-year-teacher/][Herb Greenhut]] - a
history teacher who made such an impact that he was frequently
included in his former students life events - weddings. receiving
birth announcements and so on and even got a Mayoral Citation in his
later years. I've been fortunate to get to enjoy some of these "gifts"
but I also know that many teachers, better than I and very well
regarded have not. I blame that on circumstance.

Why am I writing about this? Beyond yesterday's reminder, I've been
reflecting more about my career as I prepare to leave the classroom
full time. It's also important to point out to other teachers out
there that yes, our profession is in many ways thankless but there are
some rewards that money can't buy and even if you're not hearing about
the impact you've had, you've probably still had it.

For the younger teachers, it's there, you just have to stick with it
long enough for your current students to go out in to the world.






