---
title: How Will Online Influence Teaching
date: 2022-01-03T08:53:28-04:00
tags:
- education
- policy
categories:
- education
draft: false
--- 

I always enjoy Fred Wilson's predictions for the new year over on his
  [[https://avc.com][blog]] and [[https://avc.com/2022/01/what-is-going-to-happen-in-2022][this year]]  was no exception.

I was inspired to think a bit on his education prediction:

#+begin_quote
K12 systems around the US (and around the world) faced with teacher
shortages and desperate to erase several years of learning shortfalls,
will increasingly adopt online learning services in the school
building in lieu of and in addition to in-class learning.
#+end_quote

Fred's a VERY sharp and perceptive guy and a friend and I think
he's correct on the adoption of online learning but I thought a couple
of points merited a deeper dive from a guy who's spent a lifetime in
the trenches.

The fist thing I think worth talking about, and this isn't really
about the adoption of online learning are learning shortfalls They
don't exist. Learning shortfalls due to Covid, also described as
learning loss is a made up concept. Usually pushed by politicians.

The claim is that due to COVID students learned less than what they
were supposed to and we have to make that up. Less than what? Less
than who? Everyone in the world was hit with this.

This comes back to our countries love affair with high stakes
testing - every student MUST finish Algebra by 8th grade, or MUST have
a certain reading proficiency by 5th grade (whatever that means).

On the other hand, we're told that students work at their own
pace.

Which is it?

The truth is that a large amount of specific topics we cover in K12
could be eliminated and we'd be none the worse for wear. In Algebra 2
/ Trig there's around a month of Circle Geometry. It seems randomly
placed and really doesn't introduce any new meaningful concepts. I
suspect that it originally was placed in the course when Alg2/Trig was
the terminal HS math course and people through "well, kids should see
this sometime" but now this is no longer the case. We could easily
knock it out.

Likewise, look at how Geometry evolved. Even though it's supposed to
be a course about proof many schools only pay lip service to teaching
it. This is a result of high stakes testing. Teachers know that
teaching proof is HARD and learning it likewise. They also know that
the students need to pass the regents to graduate and that both
student and teacher will be judged on passing the exam. Further, they
know that the best route to get the student passing is to barely deal
with proof and focus on the rest of the class which is easier to teach
and learn and is worth the lions share of the points on the regents.

In English we can read one less Shakespeare and I'm sure we can go
down the list we'll find that a lot of these things that kids didn't
learn are really just arbitrary.

The other truth is that indeed people learn at different rates and
if we really cared about education we'd admit and deal with this
rather than keeping our lock step testing based system.

So, learning shortfalls are manufactured and could easily be
dismissed.

With that aside, we can look at online learning.

Just to get started - I think that online learning has a place. It can
be at times a great supplement to in person learning and at times it
can be the superior option. I'll write more about that soon. Probably
not for another week or so since Devorah and I are hoping to get away
to San Diego for a little vacation later this week. My concern comes
from me being much more the pessimist than Fred.

Well, I used to be more of an optimist but working in the system for
30 years has a way of beating you down. Now I'm much more of a "hope
for the best, expect the worst" kind of guy.

My first fear is that online learning will be used just as Fred
mentioned, due to teacher shortages. I think this is likely to happen
and it's not going to be pretty. Better to actually address teacher
shortages by, I don't know, paying teachers fairly and having them
work in safe environments with reasonable work loads.

Instead, I see a new wave of technology based solutions like online
charters which have proven to be ripe for scandal or programs like the
technology based "credit recovery" courses that came online under
Bloomberg. These were self paced online courses where students clicked
through repeatedly. Great for graduation rates. Horrible for actual
learning.

We're also going to see technology being used not to make teachers
more effective but either to add to their workload and/or class sizes.
A small and maybe frivolous example is when politicians were talking
about eliminating snow days - they'll just teach online. Now, since
you don't know a snow day is coming this leaves a teacher to scramble
at the last minute to come up with something and given how much time
can go into prep, this is a BIG add to the teachers week. As a
teacher, I loved snow days not so much as a "party day" but rather as
a day where I got the gift of a day back to catch up on planning,
grading, and paperwork. Besides, I think that rare surprise day off is
actually healthy for kids.

A bigger example is that I'm thinking that we'll see schools expecting
teachers be available to students and parents 24x7. We already see
this starting.

A third would be instead of a small class where teachers and students
interact using technology to balloon up the class size. So much of
teaching, particularly in K12 is about relationships and interactions
and you just don't get that when you decide to do a class on computers
and drive up the enrollment.

You'll also see technology that seem to help teachers but even those
have a downside. Prime example - autograders. They're grate for
providing students with instant feedback and for grading "short
answer" or "right or wrong" questions but when a teacher grades a
teacher sees a students work and gains insights into the student. If
I'm not grading projects, I'm losing that insight.

Actually, a great example is looking at student projects in the old
world and in the new one.

In the old world, a project is assigned in class. Maybe we have a lab
day or two, then some work on their own time. More lab days, then
finally the project is due and the teacher grades. With all that in
class time, the teacher is observing and interacting and getting to
know the students and their work. To be honest, by the time I grade a
project, I already know most of the story but reading over the code
and running the program on my own is the final piece.

The new way? The project is assigned. Work is done outside of hte
teacher's view. The teacher only sees the students work if they ask
for help outside of class hours (since you can't use that important
synchronous class time for that with 100+ students) and then it's
autograded.

The old way takes more time and more work but that's teaching and
learning. The new way will work great for the autodidacts and a number
of kids will flow through the machine but here technology which would
seem like a win, really isn't.

This is a lot of "expect the worst" and I do want to be clear - I love
tech and think that tech can be a great boon to education if done
right. I'm just really wary of past experience being a predictor of
how things will go in the future. I think Smart, well meaning people
are going to continue to come up with wonderful tools that could do
worlds of good for students and teachers but I have little confidence
in the decision makers deploying them in ways that will truly benefit
students.

I hope I'm wrong and none of this pessimism will stop me from working
with technologists, ed tech people, and playing with the new toys as
they become available. I just also want to be prepared for the worst
while I'm hoping for  the best.






