---
title: Turning a good class into a bad lecture
date: 2021-09-28T08:11:34-04:00
tags:
- education
- teaching
categories:
- teaching
draft: false
--- 

I've been teaching in person for about a month now so I thought I'd
give a quick update on how it's going. I've written before about my
feelings on how Hunter started the semester (TL;DR - I was very
displeased) but that's not the point of this post. As of today, I
believe every student has been required to be stabbed at least once
and on October 11, all students must be fully vaccinated to be on
campus.

So, off to the report. Going in person sounds great but now that I'm
doing it, I'm having second thoughts. Let's leave safety precausions
out of it, I'm having second thoughts just in terms of how the current
situation and related restrictions have affected my teaching.

Here's the low down. Students are supposed to wear masks at all
times and I wear mine as well. We're supposed to socially distance but
that's not possible given class and classroom sizes. Students are also
supposed to keep the same seed all the time, ostensibly for contact
tracing should anyone test positive.

To start, day one in person was important - I still haven't met my
students from last year in person and I'd really like to. This years
students, at least I've seen all their foreheads.

That's actually an issue. At least for me, the masks make it MUCH
harder to know my students. Can't get to know a face when you can't
see two thirds of it and names are going to be even harder for me.

Online, at least for those who put on cameras, we could at least see
each others full faces and expressions. Zoom doesn't carry the same
nuance as in person but neither does a masked face.

The masks have another negative. You can't hear anyone. I do my best
to actively project but students rarely do. This leads to me having
students repeat themselves multiple times and I also have to adopt a
conference speaker approach of repeating and projecting what the
student said so everyone can hear. This absolutely kills interactive
discussion and even question answer chains. It really pushes a lesson
more towards a lecture which, well, sucks.

The social distancing and keeping seats also negatively impact the
environment. I can't get in with my students like I usually do. Even
when in lecture mode, I'll move to different locations of the room for
a variety of reasons - that's pretty much out. I also can't just get
in close to support students. Likewise, group work can't happen in the
same way. They can kind of sort of work with their direct neighbor but
I can't have them work with each other as I'd do under normal
circumstances. 

Don't get me wrong. I won't compromise safety for convenience but the
safety protocols do a good job in turning a good class into a bad
lecture. 

Online is also lousy in many ways but as long as the students are
willing you can all see each others faces and you can do all sorts of
interesting groupings and group work. I think my code review lesson
worked pretty much as well and maybe even better online last year than
it did in person the year before but I'm really at a loss on how to do
it as effectively in person in a few weeks with the safety
precautions.

Ideally, I'd like the freedom to mix and match. We were in person week
one, but let me decide when we'll be in person and when we'll be
remote. Let me use the best platform for any given lesson. This would
be a bit of a drag on the students depending on how their instructors
scheduled things but if students could use the rooms that they'd be in
person for as locations to work remote from it wouldn't be too bad.

As usual, the ideal would be to trust the teacher and let them do
what's best for their students but as we all know, that's never the
way. Regardless, the interesting thing to me is that while I was
clamoring for a safe in person return, the truth is, given sensible
safety precautions, in person might just not be the best way to go. At
least not all the time.

