---
title: Maze Solving (for real) and Code Tracing
date: 2019-07-20T16:40:16-04:00
tags: 
- problem solving
- mazes
categories:
- problem solving 
draft: false
--- 

Every year for the past sixteen we venture down to Lancaster Pa. for a
weekend of car camping. Actually, there's not much camping anymore. I
used to be a bit more hardcore having done a few sections of the
Appalachian Trail in my youth. Now, as I've gotten older I've come to
appreciate little things like air conditioning, showers, beds, and
toilets. So, nowadays we usually try to get a cabin at a camp site. I
get my amenities but we still get a campfire and s'mores.

We mostly come down for [[https://www.cherrycrestfarm.com/][Cherry Crest Farm]]'s corn maze. We first did it
when the kid were little. It sounded a little hokie but everyone keeps
enjoying it so much we keep coming back. They've got a big maze - over
5 acres. Each year it's a different theme. This year was in honor of
the moon landing. 

{{< figure class="z_image_center" height="200" width="200"
src="https://bloximages.newyork1.vip.townnews.com/lancasteronline.com/content/tncms/assets/v3/editorial/d/de/dde02460-7aa5-11e6-a29b-2360b2195be3/57d991b552906.image.jpg"
caption="An older maze"
>}}


The maze is split up into 15 sections in a 3 x 5
grid. When you start you get an empty game board. As you work your way
through the maze, you find these mailboxes each containing a section
of map. You can also see what the overall maze picture looks like and
how it's sectioned off. The maze usually has a handful of major
graphical components and each is enclosed in colored tape. For
instance the moon might be surrounded by yellow tape and the astronaut
in black. In the image above, the wheels of the tractor might be taped
in one color and the cabin another.


{{< figure class="z_image_left" height="200" width="200"
src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/57LXNOhdME_k1K03HpCtIi2MnyF3WEhEY84kuX9RO1fKwJ67j2o6xFRCsO_TpUfI7t91Jcy7f56xAU6eNtR_9kDQesz8yZhoKFvAJCj-MuwDXgrhGQYACDiyfIKhO3gWNEDy2_uMZL-0zvkTlW_t6S8QidBcf8cceulKXvX6Ix3rXkHyxIcC7O6u7fLGQgb6f4Bd1iymy7APyLjqDGf6TC6ejqmDQ8ThFTfyO6kABcA8NXH6P_XO82X65lmGwVEXFVZiuzYYGO_zfOT3B0QZW3giBexk7lSJgVpdRF9OnbYQrC0nEva_pFT_79uEAbdXFSEdH8uCAAuyse6gnyunpDI0xWSffdyAPtGZZ5V_7JJmN61PFUvckWuVJC8FzCnsK_sLmi015ZxwY4M9dhhXrCmAWzhzCj4tyFcNfiot22luXnrRiWXek5Rxa0F-7UBQVZYX-I-SY2Si1ZpQrTBW8Nzi2Fo16U4HFW1yK-zd1sBhxwwZtLkQS3PxbsoUL61M5dsCWSsbjNB9gjjYA9K7MaJUSFaRN4HAXuyiUuwpa4lMXYtAmnF6mZxWpL2QPYFD5qWiZq1XUrgpwWmL6HQ3kUI5zcd87YbHPpEtbjAOte8_NQAM0jTk3rwwyEsN6n59RvUm3hA2lwIeoP2hB8QQVeFctYpsPzlF=w1752-h1314-no"
>}} 
{{< figure class="z_image_center" height="200" width="200" 
src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/MUujLBf7vV4Pr4FiLMS8mpAL0JKmyrpRRCz3uJdB61MSC0y43FADSJL-qbd92iVUEDTlQmDh1urIjySMAomjZa2gM4nQIHpLDipV84YsKYIr4pnt2SGN1INsYSHoNULPomSG-d3C1M-gbNxnD1WB6fOjAM-2E_xqu8OObeLt5UtVxtYRsQ0AEWTH5YNk2O5RZ3O085SlTeQV5xFqIUblvEGTA700wCksy4ohH9kqmRBhXiuOKhwYPn_wCQhp1_lgM4wnrvt0DUCqMX8j8hQw7bGbOnE6P-itprrwrFRhwlnQ4XuQWfmQLPadCUcT7fQC_hy6xIvmB9HGoNBDTKsHyCr_-Vuh7FPdZ6FjL_Ks59LADO9D9hgyhKzH6lkBAuBjiXgTyVIu-oHeyEqTTV2lFhvZRbq3zGEkq8Lo64dSibNO2NzdNwLJyQlNQseBKlfTCIOx2m2Z3haoeXcYY9sqjbmOzdfL_1qL1yVqNNnkl9U_8SvYXO9yQFAmZrptfYVmlEtDBnpNkFnbPGKopdc3pksgK2mzgTn7rnLM-VsQbi2mSPsjmGevsMQt1-ERL5OOcrEb2v8hu2WeGZ5Dhe5oG7GFXBBx3Xzi6p478evz0YB2ZuIfvbc6K2sMFlEltJCZvgnjn3GeevI-yolHKlHDMPktG8kvLAk_=w1752-h1314-no"
>}}

<br clear="all">

For the ultimate challenge you have to find all fifteen pieces, answer
a bunch of questions in a crossword (where the answers are strewn
throughout the maze) and find your way to the exit. It  usually takes
us about an hour and a half. There are also a bunch games, mini
activities, and even a cafe in the middle. 

Since we're a CS family we joke about how to solve the maze - left
hand rule, breadth first search, iterative deepening etc. At times, we
actually do use a mini breadth first routine. There are four of us,
when we get to an intersection, we split and explore down to the next
decision point. If two people made it to that decision point, we might
split again. I guess it's a mini combo of breadth first and iterative
deepening since we never stray too far from our anchor point. 

Over the years, I've also thought about how we handle solving the maze
in terms of approach and temperament - particularly as it gets hot
under the sun and we start to get hungry. The other week when I read
Cunningham, Ke, Guzdial, and Ericson's article from ITiCSE 2019 about
[[https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3319788][sketching and tracing code]] I started thinking about some parallels,
most notably the idea in the paper that the novices questioned trace
for patterns and goals rather than strictly tracing programs all the
way through - that rather than "being the computer" they trace less
formally until they think they see the pattern and how it will lead to
a goal. The paper notes that this is in spite of the fact that this
type of tracing doesn't seem to yield better results.



When we start the maze we usually just wander. The logic is that no
path is going to be better than any other so we'll probably run into a
mailbox or two. These are our explorations like an initial look at the
code. Then we get systematic. We look at the map piece we just found
and try to figure out which path to take next. If we hit an
intersection we try to logic which path is best. We use all our info -
map pieces, what the overall maze looks like, the sectioning tape,
other landmarks, and even any visible maze edges. This is like the
formal code trace where the student is still going through the trace
in detail.

Then, our search degenerates. We get cocky - we know what the maze
looks like so we wing it. This is when the student thinks they know
the intent of the code so they can now figure out the
answer. Invariably, we're wrong. 

Ultimately, we get hot, tired, hungry and a little
grumpy. Fortunately, we now recognize this and it's our sign to look
at our map and start being smart again - do the formal trace. 

Once we get to this point we usually finish pretty quickly. We figure
out the best way to get o sections we haven't visited, find those
pieces and then the exit. Once done, it's off to [[https://www.goodnplenty.com/][Good'N Plenty]] to
re-hydrate and eat way too much food.

I don't know if any of this means anything but it's some food for
thought. Maybe there is something to look at in human general problem
solving practices and not just classroom or computer science ones. Who
knows.

In any event, get down to Lancaster PA if you can and check out the
maze. It might be hokie but it's a lot of fun.


