---
title: Merge Over Zoom - A Hunter CS Certification Program Update
date: 2020-07-16T19:00:55-04:00
tags: 
- pedagogy
categories: 
- pedagogy
draft: false
--- 




We've been talking sorting and searching in our teacher certification
program and today was all about the merge sort. One of the strategies
we use when teaching it in person involves sorting a deck of cards by
[[/posts/2014-02-27-dumbass/][Tom Sawyering]] it with the class. It's fun and it's effective but you
can't do it over Zoom. What to do? We didn't want to just jump into
the nuts and bolts of merge sort. We could - we've got a great group
of teachers who could handle it but we're not just talking about
content in the program we're also talking about pedagogy.

How could we adapt a divide and conquer algorithm where we split a
deck of cards and pass it out to the class to a remote environment.

Here's what we came up with.

I started with a story about how I pitched Hunter about having a party
with this first cohort when they all earn their NY State CS Teaching
Certificates (assuming we could have a party in person). They said yes
but to keep costs down I had to get them a list of possible
restaurants to order from sorted by lowest price. We decided to use
Chinese restaurants and the price of pork dumplings. 

I had a long list and was going to have to go to the seamless page for
each one and get the price and then sort them. Not fun.

Since I'm running the program but have two instructors - JonAlf and
Topher working with me, we decided I could "volunteer" each to do half
the list. They weren't happy so they looked for Teaching Assistants to
pawn the work off on but having none went to the students. We
continued with the split until a bunch of students each had to look up
one and only one restaurant to find the price of the pork. We then
passed the restaurants and prices back up the chain and voila - merge
sort. .

We basically were able to replicate the in class card sorting
experience with something that we could do over Zoom. It went over
pretty well. 

We're going to talk more about what we did and why and the idea of
actively engaging students in different ways over virtual conference
technologies tomorrow. 

It was all pretty cool.







