---
title: Starting the new semester
date: 2020-08-28T08:56:23-04:00
tags: 
- teaching
categories:
- teaching 
draft: false
--- 

Thursday was the first day of the new semester. The big change was
that my classes were done remotely but there were also some other
differences. Other changes were that I only met one of my two CS
classes on Thursday. That's my CS0. I'm also teaching a recitation for
CS1 which only meets once a week. I'll see those students as well as
my CS0 students for a second time on Monday.

I opted to use [[https://codingrooms.com/][Coding Rooms]] instead of Zoom since Coding Rooms has a
nice built in REPL. We had a couple of students drop a couple of times
and I had to reload once but even that's no worse than typical Zoom
performance. It's funny how once one product becomes *it* everything
that's different is labeled as harder and whenever there's a hiccup
it's so much worse. The truth is, I've now used a bunch of platforms
and none is harder than the others - you just have to look to
different places. For example, in Zoom, you "raise your hand" by
clicking in one place and in Coding Rooms (or Big Blue Button)
another. Neither is inherently better - just different but people seem
to think that the non Zoom one is worse just because Zoom got so hot
so fast. Likewise, other platforms periodically drop people and crash
but so does Zoom. This is all a digression but it's something that
bothers me. Zoom does some things really well but then again so do the
other platforms I've been playing with. So far, there's no silver
bullet.

As you might imagine, class had a different feel. I think it went
pretty well but it's certainly going to be harder to build a sense of
community. Since there was a good deal of class logistics to cover we
didn't really get to play with the Coding Rooms REPL but I'll report
on that soon. I'll also mention that we're going to see about using
[[https://zulip.com/][Zulip]] instead of Slack for chat both in class and out. Like Zoom,
Slack is the de facto standard but Zulip seems to have a few distinct
advantages: 

1. It's open source
2. You can self host it (and it's free if you self host)
3. It's built around threads so I suspect it will be easier to deal
   with discussions both synchronously and asynchronously more easily.

The disadvantages are that there aren't as many integrations, most
notably there's no Giphy and it's not the eponymous chat
platform. Note that it's not that I don't like Slack but was driven to
look for alternatives because I don't have a budget and the free tier
has limited history and I believe integrations.

The other big change this semester involve our K12 CS teacher
certification program. Our summer cohort kicked off there next two
classes on Thursday afternoon and evening - Ethics in Computer Science
and Curriculum Development for CS. I designed both courses but am not
the official teacher. Topher and JonAlf who worked the summer with me
are each taking one but I'm going to be very involved. We also had
four students start in our Masters program. I'll be writing about all
of this over the course of the school year.

Spent most of yesterday getting ready for Monday - setting up the
Zulip server, GitHub repos and GitHub classroom and the like. As
usual, I'm a slow starter but hopefully by mid next week will feel
like I'm in the swing of things.





