---
title: Crafting a new major for tech
date: 2022-11-04T09:42:40-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc 
draft: false
---

Hunter College, like most colleges and universities is facing
unprecedented demand for CS. It's the hot major. Being a public
college, we have an obligation to provide the best education possible
to as many students as we can in our locality. This means we can't
just put a GPA requirement or other cap on the major and we can't do
things I've heard "elite" schools do like essentially making
applicants apply to the major direct from HS.

This had led to the usual problems - more large lectures, fewer
electives offered, challenges for space etc.. This is nothing unique
to Hunter.

Another problem, though is that Hunter offers a traditional CS major -
similar to the majority of institutions across the USA and the
traditional CS major is not really servicing many of our students.

Unlike many other majors, the students in CS by and large want to work
in Tech. Unfortunately, most CS programs aren't set up for this. Rather
they are set up with the assumption that all CS majors want to go on
to PhD programs which is most certainly not the case. Sure, CS
students learn programming and some other career useful things but
they also learn a lot that most ever use. Theory is important but not
as much as many have to study. Far too much proof, How about calc 2
and sometimes 3? Sure these topics can be useful and even important to
some but I've talked to countless tech people in the business world
ranging from entry level programmers to top executives and everyone in
between and by and large the CS major is poorly set up for the CS
career. What's more, the only career that many CS majors only somewhat
prepares students for is programming and even then just to a certain
extent and there are many non-programming heavy tech opportunities out
there waiting for our students.

I think many in academia acknowledge this as well. I've spoken to some
high up people at some of our most prestigious institutions and, at
least, privately, they've agreed with me on this.

As it stands, not all Hunter CS students can get through the major and
for those that do, they're just as well set up for career as graduates
of the "elite" programs but truth be told, it's not the institutions
that are setting them up well.

Hunter's trying to do something about this. At recent department
meetings there's been discussion of creating a new major - something
that maybe dumps the unnecessary stuff and replaces it with material
that is both more relevant to the students career while also providing
additional support in areas that the students need. The challenge is
to also keep the academic rigor at the same time and not just become a
jobs program for the flavor of the month.

There was a lot of talk asking "what do other colleges do and what are
they planning?" but I didn't like that talk. Who cares what other
colleges are doing? Who says they're doing it right. Every institution
has a unique situation. Hunter - a liberal arts college in the heart
of NYC which is part of the CUNY system should be figuring out what's
best for itself, not what may or may not work for others.

I suggested talking to the tech community, particularly in NYC - what
jobs are out there now and what will be out there in the next decade
and how can we structure a program to inform students as to the
possibilities and to prepare them on their paths?

Fortunately, I've got tons of former students in all areas of tech and
we've been talking for the past few weeks and trying to figure this
out.

Originally, some of the Hunter faculty were considering things like
network admin / sys admin type roles and thought to explore there but
that's not what I've been getting from my network.

A big obvious one was software engineering. This could be great for
those meant to follow the programming path but not for tech minded
people who don't want to spend their days in code. Project management
kept coming up but there were more than a few concerns that to be a
great PM you really have to have some real world experience so a PM
major wouldn't be serving students.

Another thing that came up was the idea that developers in many cases
do have more control over their infrastructure which would lead to
requiring knowledge in administering their own systems, some network
wherewithal as well as some knowledge of container technologies and
the like.

There was also a lot of talk about which current major classes were
useful and which really weren't and there was discussion of a lot of
other things like software architecture (something never taught but
much needed), technology integration, and things like soft skills
(presentations/writing) ethics and so on.

I'm also glad "the family" got the idea that we wanted to teach
academic classes and not just how to use tools. I was heartened this
morning when one of my former students recalled:

#+begin_quote
Back in the 90s when I was in your systems class I remember you
saying that you weren't teaching us Intel Assembly. We were learning
how computers worked and that we were *using* Intel Assembly as a tool
to explore to accomplish that learning
#+end_quote

Made me feel good.

All in all, I'm really grateful for my StuyCS Family (or as some say,
the StuyCS Mafia) - got all the info I needed from which I think I'll
be able to craft a very strong and useful new proposed major. I don't
think it'll focus on just one possible career but I think it should
get a student ready for a variety of entry level tech jobs including
programming related ones. What's more, it will educate them as to the
possibilities - something else current majors don't usually do. 

Will the CS department like it? Who knows but I'm convinced that it
will be a great option for Hunter students if they do.




