---
title: No Amazon HQ2 in NYC
date: 2019-02-14T17:57:32-04:00
tags: 
- policy
- NYTech
- Tech
categories:
- NY Tech 
draft: false
--- 

That was the big tech news today. I know there was a good deal of
vocal outrage about the deal but to be honest I was pretty surprised
by the news. Normally deals like these get steamrolled through for
better or worse.

I have decidedly mixed feelings about this. On the one hand, I have no
problem with Amazon - I've got a bunch of former students working
there. Mostly in Seattle but at least one in NYC. On the other hand
there were a lot of things about the deal, none of them having to do
specifically with Amazon as a company that made me very uneasy.

Let's go through these issues from minor to major.

First, I'm against special corporate incentives. In one ear I keep
hearing that these were generic incentives are available to any
company but in the other ear I keep hearing about special concessions
for Amazon. I keep thinking about stadium and Olympic deals. Those are
generally driven by politicians and money men with huge egos and from
what I can tell they generally don't end up helping the little guy.

Next we have backroom politics. Like so much in New York, it certainly
appeared that this was a back room Cuomo deal where the local
communities weren't included in the process. It wreaks of Cuomo
Hubris and ego. 

Third we have all the jobs. A recent poll indicated that residents
welcomed the fact that this deal would "create new jobs" but the truth
is that it would "create new jobs for outsiders who will come in and
replace you." This isn't a knock on Amazon but it's probably the
truth. The history of hypergentrification is not one of uplifting the
poor into the middle class. It's more like bring in the middle and
upper class from other communities and displace the poor. This would
likely be the case with this much demand for tech talent this quickly.

The local colleges, specifically CUNY will not be able to up the flow
of tech graduates that quickly without a big infusion of resources and
that's something that wasn't included in the deal. It's great that
Amazon is supporting HS CS but tech companies aren't hiring kids out
of high school with a single introductory experience like
APCS-Principals. 

Since New York will not be able to supply the software engineers on a
dime the companies are going to bring them in from elsewhere. I
remember talking to a tech executive a few years ago and he was
telling me that he was going to have to "hire X software engineers in
the next five years" and that while he "would love for them to be New
Yorkers" he'd hire them from wherever he could get them. 

Poor and working class people aren't all of a sudden going to be
getting these high paying jobs. Sure, some will get into programs like
[[https://www.pursuit.org/][Pursuit]] and get entry level coder jobs and the colleges will continue
to produce what they're producing now and ramp up capacity as they are
able but a lot of people  who were here during the bad times are just
going to be forced out.

At the end of the day most of this won't change a thing one way or the
other. LIC is already on the upswing and rents are going through the
roof. Companies will continue to need tech talent in NY and NY will
continue to scramble to try to fill the need. Amazon already has a
presence in NYC and if they want to avail themselves of the talent
that comes from and wants to move to NY they'll continue to build
their footprint here even without HQ2.

For me the takeaway is that we have to be much more aware of all our
residents and it is our obligation as a society to work to uplift
those who haven't had the same opportunities as others. That means
really looking hard at diversity, equity, and things like
gentrification. It means not just bringing in jobs without having a
plan and a path for those at the bottom of the economic ladder to
climb up into those jobs. It means working with the communities for
their and New York's benefit and not making deals that sound good and
might be good for New York as a whole but get there by amputating the
parts that we just don't want to deal with.

 

