---
title: AP Classes, Placing Students, and First Topic Exposures
date: 2019-06-03T13:27:22-04:00
tags: 
categories: 
draft: true
--- 

Just like last year, I'm taking in two classes worth of students in to
my honors program. The challenge is that I can only teach two classes
and I've got to figure out what to teach  and then which students
belong in which class.

It basically comes down to one of two courses, our CS0 (CSCI127) and
our CS1 (CSCI135). 

CSCI127 is a first programming experience. The normal class is taught
as a large lecture with small recitation/labs. It's Python based and
the kids do a bunch of small programs in a variety of domains. They
also cover a few "miscellaneous" topics including base conversions,
truth tables, simple circuits, a baby look at an Assembly language
andd an intro to C++ at the end.

CSCI135 is most analogous to APCS-A with the biggest difference being
our core language is C++. That means memory management, references
and all that good stuff. We also sequence things a little differently
than AP. For instance, we don't do sorting at all until the second
semester but do deal with pointers.

I don't teach these exact courses. My version of CSCI127 also uses
Python but is much more of a deep dive and also brings in a few
Softwae Engineering practices. I also don't teach CSCI135. Most Hunter
students take a 1 credit programming lab (CSCI136) to go along with
CSCI135. I teach a 3 credit version of that where we do a bunch of
enrichment.

On the student side, they come in with a range of CS experiences. Some
are 100% new to the subject, some are self taught, a few have taken
after school or summer programs like GWC, Technovation, or others and
a bunch have taken some CS in school with the largest numbers being
either APCS-A or APCS-Principles. 

I've found the quality of the outside experiences to be uneven at
best. More often than not kids who come from them think they're
experienced programmers and they really haven't learned anything. I've
got to be careful with them but placement is easy. They  go to
CSCI127. The same is true for kids coming in from APCS-P. APCS-P is
also very uneven in terms of what the kids come out with but it's not
a direct replacement for our CSCI127.

The big question is what to do with the APCS-A kids. APCS-A does give
students a decent programming background but it's in a different
language. There's also the memory management and reordering of
subjects. It's clear that for most students, even with APCS-A, our
CSCI135 is the right place. That said, we do offer an in house exam to
place out of it. A few of my students have done that but still do my
enrichment/lab class so I can be confident that the student is up to
speed on C++ and related issues.

All of this has led to some discussion in our department recently -
should APCS-A exempt students from our CS0? My argument is that it
should. While I'm no fan of AP or of the AP Exam, kids having finished
the class will have solved problems and built programs more complex
than those we require in our CS0 course. 





