---
title: Planning For CSTA 2019
date: 2019-07-04T17:26:57-04:00
tags: 
- CSTA
- PD
- CS Education
categories: 
- CSTA
draft: false
--- 

Looking forward to flying out to Phoenix for CSTA-2019 Saturday
morning. The conference doesn't officially start until Sunday, Monday
for me since I'm not doing any of the pre-conference workshops. We'll
have most of Saturday as long as we're up to it, Sunday, and Monday
morning. Actually, there is the GitHub reception on [[https://csta-github-meetup.confetti.events/][Sunday evening]] so
that's kind of official conference stuff.

As to the conference, I'm super looking forward to it. To me CSTA is
 a people conference. SIGCSE by contrast is more of a sessions
conference. SIGCSE is bigger and less intimate. I have a great time
there catching up with friends from across the country and when my asocial
self manages, making new ones but for me it's more content/session
driven. There are always a bunch of sessions where I say to myself "I
really should go to that."

CSTA is more intimate so it seems easier to meet and talk to new
people, even for asocial me. On the other hand, I find fewer "must
see" sessions. This makes sense though. I no longer
teach K12 and I had already designed and taught complete course
sequences going from beginner through college level before the first
CSTA conference.

Don't get me wrong. There are lots of great sessions. It's more that
many of the sessions I'm interested in are more "that looks cool" or
"interesting" rather than, "I really need to see that for what I'm
doing or where I'm at in my career."  Maybe it's just that it's really
hard for the sessions to match the value added from CSTA's "hallway
track" which I think is through the roof.

Here are the sessions I'm zeroing in on:

On Monday, the "Creativity in the K-12 Computing Classroom" BOF looks
interesting so I'll probably try to hit it. On Saturday, I'm curious
about the "Advanced CS Concepts in High School: One Tool to Rule Them
All" session. Based on the description, I'm curious how much is about
advanced concepts and how much about tooling and resources that let
you get to interesting data and applications. The "How to teach AI
across K-12" session could also be interesting.

JonAlf and I will be doing our session on using GitHub in the next
block so I pretty much have to be there :-).  In the afternoon, I'm
looking at the "You can teach Machine Learning to HS students" mostly
because I'm curious as to how the presenter's thoughts on the subject
can add to what I've done in my classes. Actually, that's also why I'm
interested in the earlier AI session. I'm also intrigued by Ed Campos'
Bootstrap Data talk but I won't directly be going down that road in
any classes soon so have to prioritize. 

For the last block, I'm intrigued by the Embroidery talk but Nifty
Assignments will probably win out.

I haven't looked over Wednesday's schedule yet - I'll leave that for
Tuesday evening. 

I don't think I'll be going to most of these sessions, I'll probably
spend a good amount of time at the GitHub booth hopefully talking shop
with my fellow educators. 

Besides, when I'm at the GitHub booth I also get to hang out with
Devorah (my wife). Did I mention, she's doing a very cool
[[http://blanketstatementproject.com/][knitting/crocheting for charity]] project that you all should check out?


Hope to see all my old friends and meet many new ones in a few
days!!!!













