---
title: Preparing to teach Online
date: 2020-03-10T23:54:18-04:00
tags: 
- edtech
- online
categories:
- online 
draft: false
--- 

I've been seeing some tweets over the past couple of days about the
wonders of online teaching. How it's at least as good or better than
in person or how we should have been doing it all along. 

Rubbish.

If you say that online is better than in person that says more about
the (low) quality of your teaching than it does about the quality of
online tech teaching resources.

I mean, it's pretty clear that anything you can do online you can do
in person since you can still avail yourselves of the same tech tools
while you can also do the in person live stuff. Online you've only got
online.

Looking at it another way, is an online show, concert, or sporting
event (weather notwithstanding) ever better than the live thing?
There's something about in person even when you take away the
connection between teacher and students and students and students that
makes it special.

While online isn't better there are times where it's necessary or can
be used to complement or enhance in person. 

Hunter hasn't made any announcements about any closings due to COVID19
but it would be foolish not to prepare. I also want to figure out if
some of my CS Teacher Certification program can be offered remotely as
not all interested teachers can get to campus. For these reasons and a
few more, I think I'd like to try to do at least a couple of my
classes remotely over the next few of weeks (sooner if it's forced
upon us).

Technology shouldn't be a problem - all my students get a laptop as
part of the Daedalus program. The only questions are will they have
sufficient bandwidth if they're joining from home and if they have a
suitable location from where they can connect in.

As part of Hunter's School of Education I can use Zoom and that has
the video conferencing, chat, screen sharing and whiteboarding. The
only thing I have to workout  is how to use the breakout room features
for group work and to see if that can flow nicely in the class. I've
got a couple of lessons that should work pretty well as first time
experiments so overall it should be pretty easy to give it a go.

Will it be as good as live? No. Will it be better than nothing?
Absolutely. Is it worth burning a live class to learn a bit about
online - to see what can be done without extensive training and class
prep and to see what can be leveraged in a pinch? I think so.

If it happens, I'll report back.
