---
title: Quarter Century Courses
date: 2020-09-15T07:09:25-04:00
tags: 
- pedagogy
- teaching 
- curriculum
categories:
- teaching 
draft: false
--- 

I was talking in our Curriculum Development class last week about the
courses I've created over the years. From the first computer graphics
course to the current teacher education courses. JonAlf pointed out
that we missed an "important" occasion last spring - the twenty fifth
offering of my computer graphics class at Stuy. I haven't taught it in
almost 10 years but it's been running continuously for a quarter
century since it first ran back in the mid 90s. Systems will hit that
mark this year and the intro course I designed a couple of years from
now.

That's pretty cool.

Looking back at all the courses I've designed and taught it's
interesting to see what I got right, what I got wrong, and why. Some
courses evolved slowly over time. The intro course fits that bill. On
the other hand, Systems had a complete reboot a few years in and has
been reasonably stable since. Interestingly enough Graphics has
probably been the most stable over the years. That's not to say that
it hasn't been tweaked here and there but overall, it's largely the
same now as it was a quarter century ago. It's been re-evaluated many
times but it just turns out that when I was teaching it I felt that it
was still hitting the right notes and my successor seems to feel
similarly. 

Funny because graphics was designed with the least thought of all of
my courses. I probably didn't feel that way at the time, but it's
true. I had only been teaching around 5 year - a beginner at best and
didn't really know what I was doing. Even 10 years in you're still an
advanced beginner in terms of teaching. Most teachers, if they don't
burn out, hit there stride at 15 - 20 and after that become truly
experienced. 

I basically created graphics because I was teaching 4 APCS/AB classes
and one geometry and *hated* grading proofs!!!! I needed to create one
more CS class. I decided on graphics because I knew I could teach it
and thought the students might enjoy it. Systems was created using
similarly deep contemplations. I got better and spent much more time
and effort designing future courses.

For the graphics class I had a few choices to make but not many. The
students mostly only knew Pascal from APCS so the language wasn't an
issue like it would become later on and since we were working on DOS
machines running Turbo Pascal there wasn't any option to use any fancy
library like OpenGL. The course basically started with the ability to
draw a point and then went though: 

 - lines
 - lines in 3D and 3D transformations
 - polygons (triangles)
 - A motion description language interpreter (stack and tree based
   shape hierarchies)
 - lighting and shading
 - ray tracing

The motion description language piece had an entire unit that was
really an intro to compilers / interpreters. 

In retrospect, the course really did make sense. It was taught to
second term seniors so it was a terminal course. It combined the
programming, algorithms and data structures from APCS, math they
did in trig, precalc (and baby calc), and a bit of physics. It as also
project based and they wrote programs that made pretty pictures so
that helped stave off senioritis. 

While the course has remained largely the same, there has been some
evolution. When Systems students started learning C we ended up
supporting that as well in graphics and now the course is more
language agnostic. We also played with topics and unit length. We
spend less time on the compiler piece now and treat that more like a
black box and have at times looked at additional topics like texture
mapping. There's also been a good deal of work put in to safety nets
and scaffolding. When you have a course where the main assessment is
one BIG semester long project you've got to make sure students don't
end up falling into a hole they can't climb out of.

It's not a surprise that the first couple of courses I designed -
graphics and systems were somewhat arbitrary. Graphics turned out to
be a solid design and just needed some fine tuning but Systems got a
complete reboot. Over the years, I learned more about curriculum
design and feel pretty comfortable designing new experiences now. Of
course, this is thirty years into my career as a teacher. 

Maybe I'll talk about the design of other classes here in the future
but for now, you can look at one of my first student's graphics
project and read about it [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/class-legends/][here]].

#+begin_export html
<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Ca_8q3ct6J4" frameborder="0"
allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

#+end_export



