---
title: Reopening Schools - de Blasio and Carranza throw kids and teachers under the bus.
date: 2020-07-09T08:18:21-04:00
tags: 
- policy
categories: 
- policy
draft: false
--- 

Yesterday, Bill de Blasio and Richard Carranza unveiled their open the
schools in the fall plan. 

The plan is perfectly consistent with de Blasio and Carranza's
education policies and efforts in general - tone deaf, ineffective,
and in this case, unsafe.

I know we were told that part of this came from survey results but we
all know that surveys are super easy to fix. I mean, ask any teacher
or parent "do you want schools to be open and in person in the Fall?"
and everyone will say "yes." Of course, there's the implication that
it's safe and I bet that part didn't make it in to the surveys.

I didn't watch the news conference live, but I was told that while
principals, parents, and children were mentioned over and over as
consulted constituents when forming the plan, somehow teachers never
came up. Typical.

The basics of the plan is that students could go all remote or hybrid
and under the hybrid model, they'd be in the schools some days and not
others.

Does this address health concerns? Doubtful. They're talking about a
third to half the students attending at a time. Take a look at any
school on opening and closing - it's wall to wall from the school to
the subway. It's a mess. Many schools are already split schedule -
they have their kids entry and egress staggered into halves or thirds
and the beginning and end of days there are *STILL* wall to wall for
blocks not to mention the subway platforms and cars. Even 1/3 isn't
going to do it and the more you stagger, the more you lengthen the
school days and this affects both staff and families. What good is
having a kid go to school so you can work if they don't start until
mid day?

Let's assume, although I don't think it's a safe assumption, that you
can get the kids to and from school safety. How big are the
classrooms? I heard that some Stuy teacher's measured them and they
could safely accommodate something like 9 -  12 people. That's in line
with what DbD said but what about transfer between classes? Some
schools - particularly those in converted spaces have TINY halls or
limited stairwells. What about bathrooms? None of this has been
addressed.

What about cleaning? Teachers have regularly begged for basic
supplies. Schools go without necessities like toilet paper and the
Mayor's saying that we'll have sufficient masks and cleaning supplies?
Good luck with that! 

Even if we have the supplies, will they be used and used correctly and
often enough? 

What about compliance? For years, schools had a "no hats" policy but
rarely are there no hats. Even when the policy works, usually it's a
result of teachers continually asking students to remove their
hats. How did those cell phone bans work? Do we really believe we can
get 100% compliance from students, teachers, and staff? What about the
younger grades? We really expect them to comply with adult
protocols?????

Even if everything is implemented, will it keep everyone safe?
Unlikely. Professional and big time college sports have extreme
incentive to "open up", boatloads of money and everyone pulling in the
same direction. They test all the time, have all the space they need
and can implement whatever protocols they want. Even with all this we
keep hearing about new cases in those populations. If they can't do it
how can underfunded schools?

With all of this, even if it's safe and even if schools can manage
reasonable schedules, students will only be going to school a couple
of times a week - will this really help parents? Maybe not. I remember
when we had Batya. We were looking for child care for just a couple of
days a week. Five days was easy, no days was easy but just a couple -
not so much. What about the shifted days? Large schools might need 4
shifts. Kids either start and end super early or super late. Will that
help parents who work "regular time" jobs?

Finally, let's get to the education side of things. High school
teachers teach five classes a day. Around 34 kids in a class. Given
room size restrictions that  means we have to split into threes. If
one teacher has to deal with this then it's a HUGE increase in
work. If kids come to school on different days they'll get different
live lessons - for each class teachers will have to make at least one
in person lesson and at least one corresponding remote lesson and I'm
over simplifying. Since you're now "teaching" 10 or 15 classes instead
of 5 I don't see how you can meet with them in person and deliver
synchronous remote instruction which means you're only actually
interacting with your students once or twice a week and there's no way
teachers will be able to actually develop materials, assess students,
and maintain meaningful contact unless someone finds a whole lot of
hours to the day.

On the other hand, if the teacher just does the in person and another
or other teachers do the remote you'll have multiple teachers teaching
a single class without any real coordination  - this is yet another
recipe for disaster.

I get it - we all want to get back to normal. I want to be with my
students but I want to be with them safely. I also get that some
students are not doing well in isolation and that remote school is
both less effective than in person and a hardship all around but when
we open it has to make sense both in terms of safety and in terms of
education. de Blasio and Carranza's plan is neither.





