---
title: SIGCSE 2022 AP or not AP
date: 2022-03-09T14:26:26-04:00
tags:
- sigcse
categories:
- sigcse
draft: false
--- 

While my series on APCS-A language choice is done, I wanted to write
this brief addendum.

While reading comments over on Facebook under my APCS posts one caught
my eye. There was a comment saying they wished the College Board would
create a data science course. I responded, why not create one
yourself. The response, shared I'm sure by many is that if a course
doesn't have an AP designation students won't sign up for it.

This bothered me.

Now, there are two basic reasons why one can't create their own
course. The first is that they don't have the background to do
so. Unfortunately, this is frequently the current state of affairs in
K12 CS. We're so new and as I mentioned in the earlier post, so many
of our teachers have been thrown in the deep end and are just learning
the CS that they need to teach. We can't expect these teachers to also
generate new curriculum. This is understandable but unfortunately it also
led us to where we are today with curriculum being driven largely by
private parties, most notably the College Board but also other
independent providers.

As I said, this is understandable and doesn't really bother me. It's
the other reason that bothers me. It's that students won't take a
class without AP designation or the related, my school won't let me
give a class more weight unless it's AP (even though it may very well
be more rigorous).

Over the past decade or so, the College Board has managed to bamboozle
the public so that they unthinkingly equate AP for good. The truth is,
some AP classes are good, some are bad and usually it's the teacher
that makes it so. The College Board curriculum can nudge the class
towards better or worse but it's the teacher that ultimately makes the
grade. What's more, in cases like APCS-P the class isn't even college
level. I've seen APCS-P implementations that were good High School
courses but I've also seen students come out of APCS-P implementations
which were worse than nothing at all. Then you some of the AP History
classes which can be passed with drill and kill. At Stuy, for one of
them at one point you had two possible teachers. One that would
stretch you and make you think but wouldn't prepare you for the exam
at all, that was on you. The other that would set you up for a 5 but
you wouldn't really learn that much, mostly memorization. Side note,
those two teachers are likely long gone so I don't mean to imply this
dichotomy exists today.

Basically, we've given the College Board far too much influence and
control over our High School curricula.

On the one hand we keep hearing that students should take more and
more AP classes and on the other, colleges seem to be giving less and
less credit.

The truth is, if a student is merely taking a class because it's AP
then maybe they shouldn't be taking it. I know that a student might
take a class for the wrong reasons and end up loving it and I also get
it that at the K12 level we have a number of required classes but the
bar for "good, rigorous course" shouldn't be AP.

Over the past couple of years I've noticed a bit of a pushback against
the College Board. The SAT is being questioned so maybe AP is next. We
can have great classes taught by great teachers developed either in
house or by engaging a variety of resources. Nothing wrong with the
College board being one of them but right now their the gorilla in the
room. Maybe one day we'll get back to actually trusting teachers and
letting them drive curriculum  and instruction but I'm not holding my
breath. 




