---
title: SIGCSE 2022 - Conference format
date: 2022-03-05T08:05:15-04:00
tags:
- SIGCSE
categories:
- SIGCSE
draft: false
---

Before diving into the content I thought I'd share my thoughts about
SIGCSE as a hybrid conference. Prior to Covid, SIGCSE was pushing
2,000 in person participants. This time around ther were a little
under 800 in person and a number of hundreds more remote. The in
person numbers mirrored what CSTA has grown to. It's a nice size. Not
overwhelming but manageable. It's at the upper edge of possibly
feeling intimate. Once you get into the thousands things feel far less
personal. You can go the entire conference not finding people you want
to connect with. On the other hand you can also blend into the crowd
should you choose that route.

Things basically ran as usual. Opening announcements and keynote,
coffee break, sessions and so on but remote was interjected
throughout. There were also remote only sessions but I can't speak to
those.

We started out with the opening keynote. Barbara Liskov Zoomed in from
her home. She gave a *great* talk going through her history which in
many was is *the* history of some key aspects of computer science,
programming languages, and programming.

There was zero downside to having a remote keynote speaker. Barbara
was intersting and engaging. I was blown away. The only thing I found
a bit weird was that I kept glancing over to the dias where the
speaker would normally stand and it was empty. That's on me though.

At the end we had Q&A from both people in the live audience and people
on the remote platform. This was an all around win.

The first thing that somewhat irked me about virtual was at a paper
session. The second paper was presented as a video. This part was
fine, maybe even preferable since it allows the presented to make sure
the video is set up the way they want and it also keeps within time
limits. The problem was that there was no Q&A. If you're going to do a
video presentation, the presenter should hop on some platform at the
end for Q&A. There is zero value added to just showing the video. I
could do that from home.

I'm not criticizing SIGCSE here. They tried something. In my opinion
it didn't work. In the future, I'd love to see video presentations but
with a live, in person or via some Zoom platform Q&A. In theory there
could be some "flipped sessions" (although I think a lot of the
flipped classroom concepts are bunk) where you could watch the video
or read the paper prior to the session and then have a meaty
discussion.

The second hybrid thing that I didn't like was a hybrid BOF. I just
think it din't work. It basically turned into a few small mini
presentations by the organizers. All the prior SIGCSE BOFs I've
attended had the hosts facilitating a room wide discussion. This was
similar but slightly more awkward in the few virtual group discussion
sessions I've taken part in. This was a case of hybrid not
working. With some people in the room and some people at home you just
couldn't have meaningful discussion. The people in the room couldn't
talk without excluding the remote people and remote conversation
wasn't available easily to the in person crowd.

Birds of a feather just don't fly mixed. Do them remote or do them in
person.

A third thing that didn't really bother me but I found weird was one
panel where one person was in person and the rest were remote while I
knew that at least one of the remote people were attending in
person. The mix just didn't flow as well for me. I've attende all in
person panels, all remote panels, and panels where all the panelists
were in a room together but presenting remotely. All of these formats
worked. It think the mix of in person and remote was just kindof
weird. In future, I'd say either have all the presenters in a room
together at a big table even if it's remote or have them all "dial
in."

Overall the conference was great so these are really nitpicks.

With this post out of the way I can get to the content posts but I
feel it would be remiss if I didn't mention a couple of non content
related highlights that the SIGCSE organizers provided.

First, the opening evening reception had a *bacon bar*. All
receptions, coffee breaks, snack times, and I'd even say sessions
should provide bacon.

The other thing which I'm more serious about is that they provided
coffee and tea before the opening sessions rather than their usual
practice of withholding caffeine for the 10:00 break. I can't imagine
it would cost much to just put out the urns early.

Overall, great conference and great job by the organizers.

Content related posts to come.
