---
title: Some Professional Development Is Worthwhile
date: 2022-10-26T16:29:50-04:00
tags:
- PD
- CS Education
- Teaching
categories:
- Teaching 
draft: false
---

No, I'm not walking back anything from [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/why-pd-wont-do/#disqus_thread][my last post]]. I still think
we have to stop using professional development as the primary means
for preparing CS teachers but I wanted to take a minute to make it
clear that while there's plenty of lousy PD out there, there's also
plenty of good stuff.

For bad PD, it's frequently mandated and frequently neither useful or
relevant or even if its potentially relevant, but the time it becomes
useful you don't remember it.

For good, first we look to our fellow teachers. A couple of years ago
at SIGCSE, they released the results of a survey of CS educators - I
think it was limited to colleges but the results were both expected
and interesting. It turned out that the majority of respondents
considered the best resource to improve their teaching practice to be
techniques learned from other teachers. I believe first it was in
department and then in external meetings but I could be wrong. "The
research," on the other hand, was way down the list.

PD delivered by colleages is the best and can happen at all levels. A
teacher might not be a CS ace nor may they be very experienced but
they can run a session on something they tried and how it worked (or
didnt') and I'll take that any day over something from a "thought
leader."

Of course, back to yesterday's post, you can't prepare a CS teacher
that way - you can take a teacher and add trick, a technique, a
practice, or a topic.

Great stuff for what it is when used appropriately.

Every time we would have those school wide required PDs, we'd all look
at the offerings and seek out the good stuff being delivered by our
fellow teachers.

There's another class of PD that can also be excellent although,
again, it's not a replacement for full teacher preparation. That's
when some group goes in and isn't trying to "train the teachers from
scratch to proficient" but rather understands that they're delivering
a limited experience. This might be to expose a new audience to CS on
an introductory level or a non specialist on how they can deliver a
starter set of CS experiences or it could be something deeper but
it'll be focussed on growing the teachers tool set and knowledge base,
not on delivering some set scripted experience.

This type of PD seems to frequently be delivered by researchers and
can be excellent stuff. It can also be delivered by content providers.

Finally, content providers can and do deliver worthwhile PD as long as
its taken in the right context. If you're a knowledgeable CS teacher
you might love some provider's curriculum and their training can be
the best way to go. Nothing inherently wrong here as long as the
training is not the actual teacher prep.


One of the best places for all of these types of PDs are at
conferences like the CSTA conference and that conference has
historically had the best of all versions of PD.

So, there it is, I'm not down on PD but I recognize that there's a lot
of garbage PD to go with a lot of good stuff. The problem and the
danger is that it's too often used as a replacement for real teacher
prep.



