---
title: Teaching Styles
date: 2021-04-20T08:31:47-04:00
tags: 
- pedagogy
- teaching
categories: 
- teaching 
draft: false
--- 


My friend Emmanuel lamented over on Facebook on "Learning Styles," or
more specifically on how it's still given credence. We all chimed in
in agreement but not an hour later I saw a Twitter thread where
education thought leaders extolled the virtues of Learning Styles all
over again. I pointed out that it's a great example as to why so many
teachers scoff at "the research" and "research backed practices."
We've seen it all before. We're told we have to teach one way or we're
failures only to be told a few years later that we have to do
something else. It's not necessarily the research (although I question
a good deal of what I've read) but also the interpretations and
implementations. There are just too many factors that are never
considered.

One factor that I've rarely seen mentioned but one I think about
frequently, particularly as I work with teachers is "teaching styles."
I'm not talking about any deep science here but we know that teachers
are people and people have tendencies, strengths, weaknesses, and
preferences. These are factors that are so important to teaching but
rarely considered. It's always "teach this way" and never what works
for you.

Think about how ridiculous that is. In what other field do we ignore
the individual strengths, tendencies and even comfort level of the
professional. In sports, we know that there are "player's coaches" and
"disciplinarians" and players and teams might take better to one or
the other. Likewise, a coaches act can grow stale over time as the
team evolves. Similarly a great coach works their system to the
strengths of the players and doesn't rigidly try to make players
conform to a system where they just don't fit. Now that doesn't mean
that a coach won't try to develop a players weaknesses or try to move
towards their favored system but the greats look at the skills and
personalities of all involved. It also doesn't mean that you can't
evolve. Former NY Giants coach Tom Coughlin was a rigid
disciplinarian and almost lost the team and his job prior to their Super Bowl run
in 2007. He evolved - became more of a players coach. He didn't change
his stripes. He was still a stickler for rules and details but he
brought in a new human dimension to his coaching game. 

Back to teaching. 

While you want teachers to have a large set of tools in the box they
are going to be better with some than with others. Of course you can't
ignore the students and how they respond but it's not a one way
street. Take my friend Jim. He's one of the best two or three natural
teachers I know. I describe him as "the teacher I aspire to be." He's
amazing. Stylistically though he's what I call traditional teacher
dominant. He presents, there are questions comments and answer, seat
work. Pretty old school stuff. He doesn't fit the constructivist mold
nor the cooperative one but he's the best. I remember talking to our
principal a number of years ago. They said "I can't bring
superintendents and DOE officials to Jim's class when they visit and
want to see what we're doing. He's great but they just wouldn't
understand and we'd get a lower school rating." He's the best but he
doesn't fit Danielson. Now before you give me the "but it doesn't
count, he teaches at Stuy" I'll share that prior to teaching at Stuy
he taught at an overall low performing neighborhood school and
experience notwithstanding, he was the best then too.

What makes Jim the best? He has his preferred style and he adjusts to
what his students need. He'll take an assortment of tools out of his
belt - some discovery stuff here, some group work there but he'll work
it in to augment his strengths rather than being something he's not
and as a result being inauthentic.

For my part I too am traditional teacher dominant. I'm not anywhere
close to Jim's level. I consider myself an above average in class
teacher who brings other things to the table and makes up for it with
honesty, sincerity, and loyalty. I'm 100% *not* a Danielson teacher
nor am I a cooperative learning one which was all the rage when I
started my career. I'll try to get new ideas and learn new techniques
and pick and choose and overall it's worked pretty well.

All of this is to say that when teaching teachers or coaching them,
don't try to turn them into you or into John Keating, Jaime Escalante,
or what have you (note to self, write up teacher movie rant some
day). Help them to look at who they are and what they bring to the
table. Mix that with the needs of their students and the cosntraints
of their teaching situation and help them to be the best they cab be.

Teaching styles, for lack of a better name is too frequently missing
from the education equation. It's totally removed by those who want
scripted curricula and cookie cutter instruction and barely mentioned
anywhere else but teaching styles are an important component of great
teaching and I wish more people acknowledged this.






