---
title: Teachers Can Learn CS and CS people will go into teaching
date: 2020-11-20T12:24:52-04:00
tags: 
- teacher ed
categories:
- teacher ed 
draft: false
--- 

A friend's post brought my attention to a new graduate CS Education Certificate
program. It's not a New York State program so isn't in competition
with what I do but it's the type of program that I was afraid of. The
type that will hurt CS education more than it will help. There was
enough discussion following the Facebook post that I thought I'd write
about it here.

Before talking about the program itself, one issue that came up
multiple times in the Facebook thread is that old red herring - we
can't teach teachers real CS because if they know the real deal
they'll all go into industry. I mean, who would want to teach with all
those high paying tech jobs.

I call BS on this.

First, let's look at math and science. While it's true that since no
child left behind, teacher certificate has been greatly
neutered. Today you can be a math teacher and know math or you can be
a math teacher who took only "math-ed" classes and barely know high
school math. Back in the day you *had to know math* or whatever your
field was. 

New York's always been the financial capital of the world and somebody
with a decent math background could always get a better than teacher
paying job on the street. Beyond that there have always been plenty of
other better paying options yet we have math teachers. Same for
science. We've got big pharma over in New Jersey yet we have science
teachers. Sure, math and science teachers are harder to find than say
English teachers but somehow they seem to be out there.

The same will be true for CS teachers as long as there's a path
towards a career. Up until recently there were very few CS teaching
positions and no certification programs so if you were a CS minded
person and wanted to teach you had two options - get a certification
in another area like math and try to teach CS anyway or go into
another field. Now that pathways into the profession are starting to
exist and one can forge a career teaching CS those CS minded teachers
to be can indeed enter the field. This will take time but it will
happen.

Related is the old "you can't be it if you can't see it." Up until
recently most schools didn't offer CS so while students could see and
be inspired by say a history or math teacher and then follow in their
career footsteps the possibility of being a CS teacher never
existed. Now it does. True, we're offering CS in far too few schools
and even in those schools we aren't reaching all the kids but it's a
long road and we're just starting the trek.

This journey will take years if not decades but at least we've started
the journey.

A critical piece will be the graduate preparation programs which
brings us back to the certification program I mentioned at the start.

Professional development and workshop models have been an important
first step to expose large numbers of existing teachers to CS and to
kickstart CS around the country but it isn't sufficient. PD is
invariably tied tightly to a product and is for the most part mass
training. It's not a model that can truly build top flight
teachers. It's an important part of phase 1 but we have to go beyond
it. 

That's where the schools of education come in. They're the ones
preparing new teachers and ultimately they will have to prepare CS
teachers as well. No matter what, well resourced schools will find
knowledgeable teachers but under resourced schools will, as usual,
have to take what they can get. Strong programs will create strong
teachers for these schools. Weak ones will leave our under resourced
schools further behind and this is why I go nuts when I see a bad
program that purports to prepare K12 CS teachers.

The program in question requires the following courses:

 - Computer Science Principles (3 credits)
 - Java Programming (4 credits)
 - Computational Thinking in K-12 Classrooms (3 credits)
 - Equity in Computer Science Education (2 credits)
 - Methods of Inclusive Computer Science Teaching (3 credits)

So to start you're taking 7 *graduate* credits in APCS Principles and
APCS-A and that's basically it for CS content. It's the quintessential
you take it you teach it. Heck, you might as well offer APCS-P to 10th
graders then just choose an eleventh grader to teach it the following
year. These are *not* graduate level classes. Now, I get it, you have
to start somewhere and you want to be able to take in candidates with
no prior CS experience. That's fine - you can start with a basic
programming course but this program both begins and ends there.


It also offers a 3 credit class in Computational Thinking. I find this
interesting. I'm guessing it's focused on teaching the younger
grades and as aside, this whole program looks like it would be pretty
good for an elementary school teacher. It just loses credibility as a
K12 program that includes high school. Based on course number it looks
that it's classified as a Teaching and Learning course not a Computer
Science course so I really question what it's all about anyway. It
also got me thinking - CS programs as far as I can tell don't have
their students take a class in computational thinking. Between the CS
and other requirements we learn it but might not even use the label. 

There are also two other teaching and learning courses - Methods and
Equity in CS. They could be fine but given what the overall design of
the program is, who knows.

As I said before, this sounds like a great program for an elementary
school teacher but I certainly wouldn't my kids taught in High School
by a teacher prepared in this way. I want my math teachers to know
math, history teachers to know history, and yes, CS teachers to know
CS. 

I get it - we need to start from 0 but when you're creating a
*graduate* program the end product has to be a truly prepared teacher
or you're doing a disservice to the teacher candidate, their students
and to the field as a whole.

The thing is that you can do it right. I think our program at Hunter
does and the early results from our first cohort are confirming this. 

Our first course is essentially a APCS-A alike because we know you
have to start form the floor. We expect our teachers to come in with
at least a little programming experience but given all the tutorials,
MOOCs, and standalone courses available I don't think it's
unreasonable to expect a teacher candidate to do a little pre-work to
get ready. We also point potential students to resources where they
can get up to speed.

From there we go to data structures and also a topics course - depth
and breadth and as a fourth CS course we have an ethics course that
includes a strong programming component rather than just reading case
studies and articles. We complement the CS with a methods course and a
curriculum design course and also fieldwork which is reuquired by NY
State. 

We talk about APCS-A and APCS-P in our CS Ed classes but don't design
our program around them. A teacher should not only be able to work
with a provide curriculum but also be able to design their own.

I think we're getting it right and I think the reason for this is that
it's designed by teachers who both know CS and have been teaching it
successfully for a long time and it's designed to  prepare the types of
teachers we want to work with. 

Yes, you have to start at nothing but you don't want to end there and
the more good programs launch the more good teachers we'll produce.

If we build them, they will come.
