---
title: Why are police held to such a lower standard than teachers?
date: 2020-06-19T12:36:04-04:00
tags: 
- policy
categories: 
- policy
draft: false
--- 


My friend Neal Zupancic, actually former student, friend, and long
time teacher Neal Zupancic posted this on Facebook. 

It's 100% spot on. I'd add my two cents but Neal captured it better
than I ever could. 

Take a minute to read it:



In my ten years of teaching, I've dealt with a number of situations
that could have potentially turned dangerous.  I've taught in public
schools and private; urban schools and rural.  I have de-escalated
every last one of those situations.  I have never once used force.  I
once broke up a fist fight using only my voice and my presence.

I've never felt the need to announce that before, because it's just a
part of my profession.  Every teacher knows it and most of the public
knows as well.  And there are teachers who have been in far more
dangerous situations than I have.  Teachers who deal with gang
activity, drug dealers, kids who bring weapons to school with the
intent to use them, kids who fight and don't necessarily stop when you
show up.  I know teachers who have been assaulted by students.  I know
teachers who have been threatened by students, including with deadly
weapons.  Every teacher is expected to deal with every one of these
situations without using force or violence.  Some of us are
well-trained, and some of us are thrown in and just go on instinct.
But we de-escalate.  We calm.  We soothe.  We help.  We repair and
restore the community.  We heal people.  We build an environment in
which those we are responsible for can thrive.

I keep seeing people ask "who would want to be a cop if you could get
fired for doing your job?"  But literally any teacher could do that
job without killing people.  Literally any teacher would have had the
patience to talk George Floyd into getting into that police car
instead of tossing him on the ground and murdering him.  Literally any
teacher would have let Rayshard Brooks get away rather than shooting
him dead, knowing that the system would provide accountability for his
resisting arrest and that you didn't have to be his executioner.
Literally any teacher knows that by the time you are in a power
struggle with a student, you have already lost.
Literally. any. teacher.

I hear these cops whining on social media and it sickens me.  They
wouldn't last a day teaching.  And of course we see that when we see
how often cops in schools arrest kids for routine behavior problems
that teachers could have solved peacefully.  We already know cops
can't handle teenagers without resorting to force.  We already know
cops in schools exacerbate racism and inequality - just like they do
outside of schools.

And the reason for that is that we fire teachers who can't control
their tempers.  We fire teachers who use force rather than let them
stay on the job and keep escalating that force until they kill
someone.  We *weed out* the bad apples.  And no teacher would ever
dream of protesting or walking off the job in support of someone who
got fired for assaulting a student.  Are you kidding me?

I'm reading posts in teacher's groups about going back to school in
fall - or in some cases, in July or August to extend the school year -
without adequate protection from coronavirus, without enough room in
their halls and classrooms to socially distance, without funding for
hand sanitizer or wipes or masks, without training or PD on blended or
distance learning, without promised raises because municipalities have
lost tax revenue because of corona - and then I see cops who walk
around in body armor and work for departments that own tanks, whining
about how hard their jobs are because they're finally catching flak
for shooting people, and it's like - what are your priorities?  Where
is your perspective?  What kind of society do you expect to raise into
the next generation when you'll fund a militarized occupying force
with impunity for homicide but you won't buy teachers masks and
sanitizer during a pandemic?

And teachers never, ever, ever whine like these cops do.  My
*students* don't even whine like these cops do.

Seriously - where do they find these people?  Our job is a hundred
times harder and if we mess up even once the way cops do every day,
we're out in a heartbeat.  And yet if I whined about it the way cops
whine about it, people would say "hey man, maybe you should stfu and
find a different job."  And they'd be right.

So to all the cops out there who think they have it rough: You ain't
nothing compared to a teacher.  STFU and find a different job.
