---
title: CS Teacher Certification - Topics in CS
date: 2020-08-02T13:25:51-04:00
tags: 
categories: 
draft: true
--- 

Officially, the last course of the summer was "Modern Topics in
Computer Science." The idea was that K12 CS teachers on the one hand
need depth beyond the typical terminal high school course, hence data
structures and also breadth so that they could create electives, mix
teasers in to the regular courses, or help precocious students with
independent or semi-independant explorations. 

If someone was teaching this in a typical fall or spring semester
course, they'd probably have a list of topics and spend a couple of
weeks on each. We wanted to do it a little differently. 

The original thought was to integrate some of the topics in with the
earlier computer science but there weren't too many opportunities due
to the compressed nature of the program. Instead, a few days before we
wrapped up data structures we gave the cohort a list of potential
topics and asked them to select one. Since the cohort had all already
been teaching CS and had differing content backgrounds we also
encouraged them to choose a topic not on the list.

When it was time for them to begin work on the topics part of the
intensive, they all shared their desired topic. Fortunately, things
worked out. We ended up with two solo students and a bunch of small
teams. The teams were tasked with learning about the topic and
designing a lesson or unit covering it. This could be for their
current students or some other hypothetical group. Each group would
also have to create a program or programs to show an implementation
and or use of the topic. Once they chose their topics, we picked a few
out of the remaining selections as topics that we'd present. 

The next few days were Topher, JonAlf and I delivering our topics and
the cohort working in groups. When they worked, we'd drop in and
support. The final two days consisted of the groups presenting their
work.

The topics they selected were:

  - Data Mining
  - Public Key Encryption
  - Blockchain
  - Natural Language Processing
  - Classic AI - Decision Trees
  - SQL / Cyber Security
  - Visualization
  - Machine Learning / Cipher Decryption
  - Genetic Algorithms
  - Classic AI - Search

We weren't sure exactly what to expect but we were blown away both in
terms of the CS content as well as what they prepared in terms of
lessons and units. 

Since this is just year one of the program we thought we'd get ahead
of the game and set up a site where we could host and share these
units and other resources so check them out [[https://github.com/hunter-teacher-cert/Teacher-Resources/blob/master/README.org][here]]. 

We didn't have a strict format for the cohort to use so each one is a
little different but each link's README.md file will get you started.

As I said, we were blown away by their work but super proud that we
also have the bonus of being able to make their work available to the
general CS Ed community. If you're looking to create a unit in any of
these, check them out.



