---
title: CS Teacher Certification - starting Cohort 3
date: 2022-06-28T10:25:35-04:00
tags:
- teacher ed
categories:
- teacher ed
draft: false
---

Tomorrow we'll kick off cohort 3 of Hunter's Computer Science teacher
Advanced Certificate program. That is, New York State's only currently
approved program for working, certified teachers that leads to New
York's new Certificate to teach Computer Science.

This is not our first rodeo, having gone through this twice already
but there are a few differences this time out.

First off, we're going big. Cohorts one and two had about 20
candidates each. This time, we'll have around 55 teachers who will be
joined by around 5 masters students. That's exciting but a little
scary. I'm sure I've also mentioned before that a handful of our
teachers are from the Dryden school district up around the finger
lakes. I'm super excited that we're able to not only work with NYC
teachers but also to help build the community beyond the five
boroughs. 

Bigger cohort means more instructors. Adding to the team this
year is my long time partner in crime Sam. I wanted to include Sam
from the start but unfortunately he was on sabbatical the year prior
to cohort 1 and according to DOE rules (he's a K12 teacher) you can't
work in any capacity during your sabbatical year. Sam's been involved
in almost all of my teaching side projects along with JonAlf and
Topher so it's great that we can get the band back together.

We're also adding on my friend and colleague on the Hunter CS side,
William and I've been looking to be able to actually work with him for
years.

We'll also have  4 TAs per class. That is going to be interesting. The
TAs are undergrads - they're all terrific but it's possible that some
of the candidates teach in the schools that the TAs attended. It'll
all be good but it will be interesting.

As to running the show, we'll still use Zoom - one big Zoom when
appropriate but breaking into groups of assorted sizes as appropriate
from small breakout rooms to midsize "sections" for sharing. This will
be a bit of an experiment but we'll get it right. One nice thing about
teaching teachers is that they know when you're trying something new
and if you're open and honest they'll help you to get it right. I
think that's also probably something unique about our program. Since
it's designed by and for K12 teachers and many of the instructors are
K12 teachers we're all part of the same community. It's not a bunch of
K12 teachers taking some classes taught by college people who have
theories of how to teach K12. I mean, yes, we do have college profs
involved as well but we also have K12 teachers, including myself
who've walked the walk. The teachers in the program get this and know
we're a family and our goal is to make the program as strong as
possible, not only for them but for future participants.

Now, that might sound a little hokey but I really believe it.

Beyond Zoom we'll be using Slack for all discussion - much better than
using Zoom chat. Besides the extra Slack features, Zoom chat goes away
when the Zoom closes. Our Slack from even cohort 1 lives on and is
still active. Truth be told, I prefer Zulip to Slack but we had
already committed to Zoom which is fine.

The final piece for tooling is repl.it and that's been a game
changer. During our first year, repl.it wasn't quite up to speed so
teachers had to install environments on their own computers. This was
at the start of the pandemic so it was 100% remote. Woof. All sorts of
issues including some nice ones like a teacher with a DOE laptop that
used to have Java on it but not any more (but the registry still had
some hidden settings). Repl.it allows us to have one single consistent
interface that everyone can use plus it integrates with GitHub. Of
course, if a student comes in with a stronger background they can do
their own thing but using repl.it has made things so much easier.

So, tomorrow at 9:00am we're off to the races. An 8 day all day
programming class followed by 16 half days of more advanced
programming along with 16 half days of CS teaching methods. In the
Fall we'll do our ethics class and curriculum development and then
finally topics in the Spring.

That will bring us to around 100 certified teachers.

Probably won't sleep tonight but looking forward to tomorrow.




 
