---
title: CS Certification summer intensive - the home strecth
date: 2020-07-24T07:30:32-04:00
tags: 
- teacher cert
categories:
- teacher cert 
draft: false
---

We've a week to go in the summer intensive part of our CS teacher
certification program so after an intense few weeks, I can start to
breath a little. There's still a lot to be done but I feel like I can
breath. 

The first three and a half weeks covered programming and data
structures with a bunch of pedagogy mixed in. This meant a lot of day
to day adjustment of what we were teaching and how we were teaching
it, after all, this is the first time a program like this has ever
existed let alone shifted from in person to remote. Now we've moved in
to the last course - Topics, combined with yet more pedagogy. This is
the easy part. Each cohort member selected some area of computer
science that is both new to them and not covered in a typical K12 CS
class. We provided some ideas but they were free to come up with their
own. They're spending time learning about the topic and designing a
lesson or unit around it. The deliverable is a unit plan with
resources and guidance on preferred pedagogy techniques and a code
implementation of the topic. The idea is that in addition to showing
their own expertise that other cohort members can use the project as a
resource for their own classes at some future date.

The next few days consist of us supporting their work while mixing in
a few lessons on topics that they didn't select. Much easier than the
first few weeks. 

Looking forward to some cool presentations - Blockchain, public key
encryption, some machine learning and more.

Really happy about how this has all played out.




