---
title: A 10X Student Story
date: 2019-07-17T15:39:40-04:00
tags: 
- misc
categories:
- misc 
draft: false
--- 

There were a bunch of threads on the 10X Developer recently. You
know - that mythical beast that's 10 times more productive than the
regular software engineer. I didn't see any of the original threads
but I'm guessing they started with "your startup needs them" and then
moved to the "they can't work with anyone" along with tons of fun
tongue and cheek 1X engineer tweets.

It got me thinking about 10X students. 

Regardless of what you think about 10X developers, 10X people do
exist - at least to the way I'm thinking about them. There are people
who in any given dimension are "better," however you define that, than
other people. In our society, if they're 10X in popular sports we
treat them like demi-gods and frequently when achievements are group
efforts, we, as a society designate one individual as the 10X star and
laud them rather than the group.

Regardless, there are 10X people. At Stuy, I've had a chance to work
with a number of them and I want to tell you a story about one and how
it affected the way I look at my students.

Let's go back to the early to mid 1990s. I was teaching my first crop
of CS students. Many were math team aces. One in particular, Alex was
a superstar. Alex would end up representing the US in the
International Math Olympiad where he scored a perfect paper. He ended
up going right from Stuy to grad school even though his friends, the
math chair and I were trying to encourage him to start as an
undergrad. Why were we pushing Alex not to skip undergrad? Because
Alex was wired differently. While he was truly a genius with respect
to mathematics and he did pretty well in his other classes by turning
everything into a math problem he was not good with people. 

His friends spent years pulling him out of his shell and seemed to be
making progress but felt that if he ended up cloistered in grad school
all progress would be lost. 

In the end, he went to grad school but this story is about a
programming competition.

At some point, one of my students, Eliot, told me about the USACO and
that he and a few others wanted to participate. It would be one day at
Stuy - a Saturday I seem to recall. While Stuy was on the internet
back then, the competition wasn't. We were working on IBM PS/2 machines
running DOS. The students would write the programs and run them, print
out their solutions and I would compare the solutions with the correct
answers. When all was said and done I either had to mail a disk with
the solutions or printouts, I forget which to Rob and Don in
Wisconsin. 

Over the course of the day, participants would come up to me with
solutions and I'd check them off. At one point, Alex came up and said
he was done. I asked him to bring up his printout. I got a blank
stare. We went back and forth for a while with Alex seemingly being
recalcitrant about not bringing it up but he finally did.

Meanwhile, the other participants started to notice.

I started to look over Alex's code. Lots of variables. Typically named
X, XX, XXX, XXXX etc. Maybe there is something to the 10X dev not
being able to write code well with others :-).

I told Alex that I needed to see the printout with the input and
output. He looked at me quizzically. Again we had a few minutes of
back and forth and Alex went back to print out his results. 

One again, the other students took note.

Finally, Alex gave me the printout with the results and I started
comparing the answers to the desired output - the answers were REALLLY
LONG integers so I had to check digit by digit. All the while Alex
looked at me as though I was nuts.

The competition concluded, we packed up and I took the stragglers out
for dinner at the local diner. 

The next week, some students apologized for Alex's behavior. They
thought it was rude. Not as bad as what another math ace would do to a
teacher a couple of years later which caused that years math team to
go west side story on him and almost beat their teammate up for
disrespecting a teacher but still they thought Alex was out of line in
the way he treated me during the competition.

After thinking about Alex's interactions with people, I had a
different take.

My take was that Alex very much respected me. To him, at the start
when he said he was done, he felt that I was a smart guy so I saw how
trivial the problems would be for him to solve. He then understood
that rules said that he had to give me the printout of the programs. 

Then, to Alex, again, I was a smart guy so clearly I could instantly
see that his printouts were correct so why was I insisting on the
output? Finally when I had to compare the digits, Alex was very
confused. "Z's a smart guy, surely he can instantly see that my
answers are correct..." 

Alex wasn't being disrespectful. He was showing me more respect than I
deserved. 

My interactions with Alex through the rest of the year as well as
observing him with others confirmed this. This wasn't a super smart
kid being a jerk and looking down on us mere mortals. Here was a kid
who saw the world differently and thought that the rest of us had his
gifts if not more.

I've had the opportunity to interact with a number of 10X
individuals. Some as students, some as peers and colleagues, and some
as friends. More often than not, in my experience,  they're wonderful unassuming
people. They assume I bring as much if not more to the table than they
do and they value what I have to say. It's my insecurity that makes me
uncomfortable if I don't have my A game. 

Sure, sometimes they're jerks but most of the 10X people I've
encountered are anything but. The nice thing is that when I do meet a
10X who's a jerk, I can remind myself that I know an 11X who isn't so
I don't have to waste my time on the 10X who is.




