---
title: Trends In Professional Development in CS - it's not all good 
date: 2022-01-25T17:46:43-04:00
tags:
- PD
- CS Education
categories:
- PD
draft: false
--- 

My friend [[https://twitter.com/mrtomocon/status/1486012499304587269][Tom]] tweeted earlier which led me to [[https://csforall.medium.com/virtual-professional-development-is-here-to-stay-d2a3888f2d1a ][this piece]] on trends in
CS professional development (PD). Tom's tweet was talking about virtual vs
in person PD so I initially thought I'd write about that and PD in
general but the article actually led to some deeper issues with PD.

The article talks about PD being focussed on specific units or
modules, narrowing to more popular offerings and also becoming less
localized. This led me to think about a real issue with CS PD that a
few of us have been harping on for years. The *VAST* majority of CS PD
is provided for by "content providers" - people with a product to
sell. That might be a curriculum, a technical platform, or both but
something to sell. It's not just CS knowledge and how to teach
it. I include organizations like code.org in this bucket because while
they're not selling in the same sense as a textbook publish, they are
selling or pitching their curriculum and platform.

It's easy to see how we got here. There are so few people out there
that actually know both the CS content and how to teach it that there
was a void so EdTech and a few others stepped in. The truth is, most
of the big PD providers also don't have both deep CS and deep CS
pedagogical knowledge. What they do have is influence. This isn't to
say that they're all bad. There are some providers whom I like very
much and I think are doing a great job but that's not the point here.

So, we're left with a system where the majority of CS teachers have
very little CS or CS teaching experience and the providers are pushing
very specific training tied closely with their product, course, or
curriculum. I know I'll get some hate for this but it's just where we
are right now.

This might change over time as preservice teaching programs start to
emerge but I fear that many of them will just continue the trend of
pushing canned curricula. I've already seen proposed and existing
programs that essentially have a teacher candidate go through a
version of APCS-A, APCS-P, a computers in society class and something else
similar and voila, CS teacher.

Let's contrast all of this with math PD or at least the math PD that I
was subject to for most of my high school teaching career. Most
department meetings I attended always had a PD piece and that was
usually something interesting, or at least supposed to be interesting
presented by a colleague. It might be one of their practices or it
might be something they got from a conference or an outside PD. We'd
also have larger PD sessions a couple of times a year. Topics would be
things like:

 - How to use the graphing calculator to explore functions
 - History and math
 - Math in your student's worlds
 - Exploring math competition problems
 - An introduction to some advanced or new math topic
 - Motivating a lesson on something or other

Few of these were tied to a specific course and none were tied to a
specific implementation or curriculum. There might be a special
section on something like Geometers Sketchpad or a vendor might run a
session but those were in the minority.

It was mostly about math and how to teach math and most offerings were
by teachers not content providers.

I don't know what math education PD is like now but what a word of
difference.

Will CS PD get better, and I do think locally, teacher  generated PD
is better? I don't know. I've been told that the sessions I ran
pre-covid were worthwhile but I don't see those happening again until
we can do in person events and in any event that's small scale.

All this said and I haven't touched on what led me to the article to
begin with - the point that PD is going much more virtual. Is this a
good thing? Sometimes but it's also, in my opinion a confirmation on
the sad state of PD in general.

The idea behind PD is ongoing professional growth but the truth is,
teachers don't really have time for PD during the school year so what
they do is mostly mandated. In my own experience and in talking to
many teachers in many subject areas the majority of PD forced upon
teachers is garbage. Even if it is good, too often it's not relevant
to the teachers day to day and by the time it matters, if it ever
does, it's long forgotten. Unfortunately, many teachers are required
to accumulate PD hours. In NY they're called CTLE hours (Continuing
Teacher and Leader Education).

Since teachers are being forced to accumulate these hours and they
don't find them valuable they're taking the path of least
resistance. That frequently means online offerings.

None of this is to say that online PD is bad or always bad. It can be
very effective for some things. Others really should be done in
person. I'm just saying that it's not a surprise that we're here and
that we have to look deeper to figure out how we got here and why.

Where do we go from here? I have no idea. I've long resigned myself to
try to just worry about my corner of the world. I'll make the best
offerings I can be they in my pre/in service courses or in PD wether
they're in person or online. I think that those that come will find
value so those are the ones I'll worry about.



   





