---
title: Turning 55
date: 2022-10-19T15:15:25-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc
draft: false
--- 

So, I turned 55 today. Another year older. The changes? Well, I'm
seeing more doctors and seeing them more frequently and to be honest,
I'd love to have a day or two without some small niggling ache or pain
but that's life. Like many people my age, we've got our health issues
but I'm pretty active and managing mine (hey, I had a great 8 mile run
this morning :-) ).

Still, 55 is a big one. Yeah, I know, it's not 50 which ends in a 0
and is half a century so people seem to earmark it. It's also not 62
or 67 when social security can kick in for most people. Nope. It's
also not 65 when you get all those senior discounts.

Fifty five, for teachers who started around when I did is that magic
age that, if you've put in enough years (which I have) you can retire
and start collecting unreduced pension benefits. 

I mentioned [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/turning-54/][last year]] that I was starting to think about retirement as
a possibility. Of course, that doesn't mean getting out of the game
entirely but if I go that route it means reducing my work obligations
be they at Hunter or elsewhere. Regardless of what I do, I think I
still have something to offer in terms of CS, the Tech Industry,
Education, and the intersection of the three.

Regardless of what I decide to do, it's been a tough few years, and
I'm feeling somewhat burnt out and it's calming and relieving to know
that if I wanted to, I could now step back whenever it suits me.

So, now to do some hard thinking and have conversations about this
with family and friends (yes, dear reader, I'll be reaching out to
some of you) while I work to make the experiences of my current
students as positive and rewarding as I can.


