---
title: Virtual Conferences - CSTA 2020
date: 2020-07-13T16:27:02-04:00
tags: 
- csta
categories:
- csta 
draft: false
--- 

I'm wasn't supposed to be in NYC this week. I was supposed to be in
Arlington Virginia with around one thousand of my CS Teacher friends
at CSTA2020. Devorah was going to spend the days at the GitHub booth
[[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/blanket-statement-2020/][teaching knitting]] and I was going to do a GitHub workshop and
generally enjoy the show

Of course nobody's traveling these days and CSTA2020 is running
remote. This is my second virtual conference as I attended parts of MongoDB
world a few weeks ago.

I'm still forming my opinion on CSTA2020 but I thought I'd share my
thoughts in progress.

To start, virtual conferences aren't the same as in person - they
can't be. For me, CSTA is a person first conference rather than
session first. That is, I get most of my value from the hallway
track. That's not to say I don't enjoy the sessions, it's just that
for me personally, I get more from the chats than from the talks. By
contrast, for me SIGCSE is more about the sessions. There are a few
reasons why things fall this way but there neither here nor there.

So, since there can't really be a hallway track, I was wondering how
CSTA2020 would feel. 

TL;DR - it's different but still pretty great.

Keynote's are keynotes wether virtual or in person so not much to say
in them so let's move to the sessions. CSTA is using hopin.to and it's
working pretty well. MongoDB used another platform that seemed to be
more glitchy. Hopin's been working pretty seamlessly for me. I'm
presenting tomorrow so we'll see if that changes my view. None of the
sessions I attended brought any participants "on stage" so
interactions were through the chat. It worked pretty well but at times
there was so much chatter that things flew off the screen before you
could read them.

Overall, I'm digging the plaltform. Not the same as in person but it's
a good approximation.

The vendor / exhibit area worked pretty much the same way so not much
to say there. 

Overall the interface is pretty smooth. Navigation could be smoother
and so could user search but overall, pretty nice.

So, where are we at? We've got a pretty good platform for sessions
with decent navigation, chat, and messaging but what about that
hallway track. 

We don't have one but we have a pretty cool alternative. Hopin has a
networking feature. When you drop in, you're matched with someone else
randomly for a 5 minute video chat. After five minutes, its over. You
can come back in and chat with someone else or be done with it.

I really like this feature.

For someone asocial and somewhat awkward like me, it's great. Five
minutes isn't too long to get awkward but it's enough for a brief chat
and you can follow up later. The randomness lets you meet new people.

In some ways it's better than in person. I frequently fly solo at
conferences. At this point I know a decent amount of people but when
at a new conference, it's hard to break in. The reason is that many
colleges or schools send groups of teachers and they cluster together
making it hard for an individual to join in. I see it and fee it all
the time, With this platform, you're dumped in one on one - no worries
about cliques. 

So, what's the verdict. 

I'm loving the networking feature and liking the overall tool. I hope
CSTA's in person next year but I'll be a happy attendee even if we
remain remote.

