---
title: To Zoom or not to Zoom
date: 2020-04-07T14:03:13-04:00
tags: 
- tools
- ed tech
- covid19
categories: 
- ed tech
draft: false
--- 

Zoom has been on a wild ride. As teachers scrambled to try to deliver
instruction from there homes to student homes Zoom quickly became a
favorite. It was easy, performed well, and had features that other
services seemed to lack. Features like being able to mute students and
for me a big one - breakout rooms. Now, these features weren't
flawless as I mentioned [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/limitations-of-remote-teaching/][in my last post]] but that's okay. Zoom wasn't
designed to be a virtual classroom and has worked remarkably well
given that it was designed as a tool for traditional business. 

Soon though there was blowback. 

Zoom has privacy issues.

Zoom is sharing your data with Facbook.

Zoom is insecure.

[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zoombombing][Zoombombing]] will destroy our kids.

And the love affair was over.

I quickly began noticing "Zoom shaming" on Twitter and Facbook. Public
figures and even other teachers shaming teachers for wanting to
continue with Zoom. 

In NYC, the DOE quickly moved to ban the tool. Showing their usual
level of respect for teachers, they announced this at the very end of
the week and told them they had to figure out how to live without it
by Monday morning. Oh, by the way, technically teachers are hourly
employees. This came on top of them canceling spring break - a break
that many teachers were counting on to both catch their breath and
also to figure out this brave new world, after all they were given
pretty much zero lead time and zero training and have been doing all
this under the gun and yet still have done a yeoman's job of caring
for their students.

But I digress. I don't really want to talk about the DOE and our
government's shortcomings here. I want to specifically address Zoom.

Let's talk about the data sharing. Is that an issue? Sure. I don't
know the extend of the data that they were sharing but users should
have control over their data and information. Forget about
regulations, just in terms of right and wrong this should all be
transparent and teachers, students, and parents should be able to opt
in or out and there should be no downside to opting out. What gets me
though is that the DOE is all of a sudden concerned about student
data!!! When did that happen. Seems hypocritical that now this is an
issue as opposed to, well, sharing data with the college board,
charter schools, and who knows how many other private entities. 

Next up, zoombombing and the like. It seems that if you follow
best practices - having students use names and using a conference
password and waiting fooms that's taken care of.

Security? I keep hearing about Zoom's lack of encryption. I'm not an
encryption expert but there is still transport level end to end
encryption. It's just that Zoom isn't encrypting data at the
endpoints. From what I understand this could still leave a conference
open to man in the middle attacks but I'm really not sure how great
the risk is. What I do know is I keep seeing posts and tweets by
people who I'm fairly sure no next to nothing about either encryption
or network security spouting off as experts.  

The bottom line is that most teachers are going well above and beyond
to do the best they can for their students. I'll also say that the DOE
and politicians care for students as a whole but teachers care for
them as individuals and that's important to remember. Teaching is
already incredibly hard. Teaching a single class doesn't just involve
standing and teaching for 40 minutes. It involves planning, then
teaching, then reflecting. A synchronous tool like Zoom best
approximates this. It might not be the best way to do things remotely
but it's a quick way to connect with your students and to give them
something both in terms of content and normalcy while figuring out how
to do it better (hence the importance of that now erased spring
break). If a teacher has to go async or only do chatting async they
still have to do all the planning and reflecting but also might have
to make videos without the benefit of feedback, copious handouts or
who knows what. Maybe Zoom isn't the best tool but for many teachers
it's the best tool for right now.

Teachers should be given access to all manner of tools and be trusted
to make the appropriate decision given the circumstances. Does Zoom
have issues? Sure. Might it violate policy or regulation? Sure but
these are not normal circumstances.

When I was rounding up strays on 9/11, fleeing from Stuy as the towers
fell, ultimately taking them to my apartment in Chelsea only to later
deliver them home I'm sure I violated any number of DOE
regulations. In the days and weeks that followed I'm sure I violated
more as I attempted to work to connect students and families together
and then to deliver the best instruction I could under trying
circumstances. You know what - I bet those students and their parents
didn't care that I violated any policies. Years later I heard from
parents - parents of kids that I didn't even teach thanking me for
what I did for them and their children. When you're in a crisis it's
about the kids not about regulations. If Zoom is the best tool right
now for a teacher and their kids, let them use Zoom. If there are
issues, fix the issues or transition to something else but only by
giving them the time so that the students aren't hurt by the process.

Trust teachers to do the right thing. A former teacher, friend and
mentor of mine, [[https://cestlaz.github.io/posts/2012-05-09-my-favorite-year-teacher.html/][Herb Greenhut]] once said that it was easy to solve
the education problem: "Hire great teachers and get the F out of the
way." We've got a lot of great teachers. The system should support
them but if they aren't going to do that, at least "get the F out of
the way."
