---
title: "Back to Work"
date: "2012-11-02"
tags:
- community
-  csed
draft: false
---


### On going back to work today

Since school was still out due to Sandy, we ran a second online class
yesterday. At the end of the session, which I'll summarize below, I
told the class what I wanted them to accomplish today and over the
weekend. One student queried "you mean no class on Friday :-(?" Alas
no -- while students aren't reporting to school this morning, teachers
are.

Of course the logic as to why is far from sound. Some schools are
fine, some not, in our case, there's no subway service south of 34th
street or coming in from Brooklyn and we're located near the tip of
Manhattan.

What are we going to do? Who knows. We don't have lessons to plan and
while Stuy has power, phones and internet are out. Professional
development? Even when planned extensively, I've found it to be mostly
useless (I always have to sit through math PD, for example, learning
how to use a graphing calculator).

So, we're going to report in for no real purpose. Best I can figure,
the city wants teachers in so they can call it a professional
development day then they can try to change things so that students
will report during Brooklyn Queens day next semester thus restoring
one instructional day lost this week. Not a bad idea to recapture the
day but to make teachers - coming from all over the area - trudge in
for no purpose just to play politics is distasteful but unfortunately typical.

To add to the insult, not only are us teachers still in the dark as to
what's going on, we weren't even told when to report until after
midnight yesterday. I woke up at my usual 5:00am to exercise but first
checked my email -- waiting was an email from Chancellor Dennis
Walcot. I recieved it at 12:52 this morning. This was when I was first
told that I was to report to school at 10:00am. I can't believe this
decision couldn't have been made and emailed out a few hours
earlier. In any event, I'm waiting until 10:00 to get in - I've often
found the building locked when I've shown up before official opening hours.

So now for the part of my job that I actually enjoy:

### How did yesterday's online class go?

Today's class was a wrapup of a mini project -- basically an
add-a-line story site. You can see an unfinished version that two of
the students put together [here](http://ml7.stuycs.org:5200). You can
see more of the stuff we are using on our [class github
page](http://github.com/organizations/stuycs-ml7). The students are
using [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org) which is a python website
generator along with [MongoDB](http://www.mongodb.org). We had to tie
up some loose ends.

We again broadcast a Google+ hangout live through YouTube and we again
used a google doc as a chat space. This time we used the right hand
side bar for comments and only used the document for more permanent
material (a web refernce for example). It worked much better.  The
vertical flow of comments on the sidebar were much easier to track and
work with than a freeform document.

The session still had the time delay problem and the feedback loop is
still a killer but the students again seemed to enjoy the
experience. This is clearly not a replacement for in person teaching,
but again, better than nothing on a day off.

### And a note on the Stuy CS Culture

The seniors were game for this experiment and would be happy to go
again today if we were able to.  They also continually surprise me in
little ways. When we started this mini project, we all had to learn
how to use MongoDB (myself included). At first I had a hard time
confirming that they had done the outside work to learn the MongoDB
specifics. Only as they continually gave me better alternatives to my
approaches did I know that they were on top of things.

On the other hand, my sophomores were much less receptive to an online
class during the hurricane days. A handful wanted to give it a go, but
the majority never responded to my email. Why was that?

I have a few thoughts.

+ A big reason is that I've only been with my sophomores for a short
time. We haven't yet built the rapport and culture that exists in my
senior classes. I always notice a difference in class attitude around
Halloween but we really don't have the feeling of family until late
November or some time in December.
+ The sophomores are in a required course, the seniors an elective. I
think this is secondary to the culture / rapport but I'm sure it has
an effect.
+ I believe the seniors have a better understanding that what we're doing in class is to their benefit and the sophomores are still

I'm going to have to pay more attention to the time line from when
students come into my class and when they become part of "the family."


