---
title: "What I learned from Pete Seeger"
date: "2014-01-30"
tags:
- misc
draft: false
---



<div align=center>
<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/VucczIg98Gw" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

This past Monday I, like may woke to hear about the passing of
[Pete Seeger](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pete_Seeger). Ten days
earlier we were up at Symphony Space for the "Woody's Children" 45th
Anniversary Concert. Pete was supposed to perform but was ill. At 94
years of age, I wondered if the end was near. I was at the concert
with my family as well as with my buddy Ben. Fitting since Ben and I
grew up on Pete's music while many of our peers did not.

If you're not familiar with Pete Seeger, his life and his work, I
really encourage you to check out the 2007 documentary [The Power of
Song](http://video.pbs.org/video/2365166823/). He was truly a
remarkable man. One of the most influential singer, songwriter,
activists of our times yet remarkably humble and approachable.

I remember seeing Pete when I was a schoolboy. He would have been in
his fifties at the time. Thirty years later, he was singing for my
son's second grade class in the same public school in New York City.

Pete's been eulogized by far better writers than I so let me just
share some of Pete's influences on me.

Something that Pete said, highlighted in the PBS documentary - "Think
global, act local." Peter attributed it to Rene Dubos. As a teacher
and someone trying to make a difference through education, I think
about this a lot.

As teachers, we have to act locally. We work with our kids every day
and can make a difference in individual lives. While we're doing this,
the global picture is a mess. Teachers are vilified, schools are
closed, and policy is set by people who have never been in the
classroom.

There is hope, however. Just like Pete and the [Clearwater
movement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hudson_River_Sloop_Clearwater)
local action, spearheaded by the likes of Diane Ravitch seems to be
taking hold. We're starting to see common core exposed and the types
of evaluation systems pushed by the Gates foundation debunked. Think
global, act local.

Now, as you know, I'm a computer science educator and there are many
similarities between CS education and general education. Most of the
noise you hear is from non educators, or at least non K-12
educators with actual real experience and a real track record.

These voices range from well informed, to well meaning, to
misdirected.

Last year the CSTA held a twitter conversation with K12
CS Education thought leaders and there wasn't a k-12 teacher amongst
the listed participants.

Code.org, a well meaning organization that has done a great job
exciting people abotu CS Ed has a quotes page. The closest thing to a
teacher there is Randi Weingarten and she was just in the classroom
for a cup of coffee. The only other person on the list with "teach" in
their title is Wendy Kopp who believes that poorly trained temps make
better teachers than experienced pros.

So, how will the conversation turn? Will groups and individuals with
influence engage those of us on the ground with actual results, or
will will receive dictates from on high? Time will tell.

Meanwhile, all I can do is continue to act local. I can't say what
will happen in the greater CS education landscape but I know that
every day I will see 150 kids and 20 more every Saturday. My kids, who
will be part of the Stuy CS and now CSTUY family. They might not know
now what they're getting, but I do and I know I've made a difference.

