---
title: "Become a CS Education Thought Leader - No Experience Needed"
date: 2016-04-20
tags:
- policy
draft: false
---

A few weeks ago, a friend asked if I knew any CS teachers that were
available to work this summer. At the time, I didn't have anyone to
recommend. We were still up in the air on running CSTUY's SHIP summer
immersion program.

We ultimately decided not to run SHIP this summer. Mostly due to the
fact that in my new position, I didn't have the time to do the
necessary fund-raising and outreach. We're continuing with our Saturday
program through mid May and plan to bring more opportunities to the
kids of New York City in the future.

That's not what I want to write about today. That summer program
looking for a teacher, let's call it program X made me think about
many of the players driving K12 CS education both in NY and beyond.

It turns out, the people that were running program X didn't have a
teacher, didn't have curriculum or program, and in fact didn't have
a plan. What they were able to do, however, was raise money.

This is a sore spot with me - for CSTUY, we run program to program and
for me, fund-raising is the hardest part. Here we have a program that
has no idea as to what they're going to do or who's going to do it and
they ended up with substantial capital to work this non-existent
program.

It's a sore spot because I've seen it before and seen it over and
over. People with either little or no CS experience, little or no
teaching experience and frequently neither being anointed as thought
leaders in CS Education or at the very least, the people with the "hot
program."

I've seen this in companies, non-profits, for-profits, and
government. Some of these groups and programs are now considered
undisputed leaders when, if you dig beneath the hype, they really
don't know what they're doing.

Now, there are some "thought leaders" who have been in the trenches
and know their stuff but they seem few and far between.

I know that all of these people running these programs and being given
this platform to influence our young are well meaning and I welcome
everybody to the table but maybe, just maybe they should take a step
back and ask themselves - do they really know what they're doing or
are the just experimenting with other peoples children.


