---
title: "2017 in review - K12 CS Education"
date: 2017-12-27
draft: false
---

It's been a big year for K12 CS education. More and more states
looking into CS as a K12 academic area and all that entails, the
CS4All movement is well underway and the College Board launched a new
exam. These are just three of many big things that happened in the
past year.

I'm excited about the overall growth but concerned about a number of
issues. I've written about all of them in the past so won't rehash
here and in any event, the issues I'm concerned about are issues I
have no influence on.

Instead I thought I'd look at some local CS Ed happenings. Things
where I have been able to contribute.

Probably the biggest thing happening that I've been involved with is
New York State's [[http://cestlaz.github.io/posts/NY-CS-Certificate/][moving forward on CS teacher certification]]. I
developed CS teacher preparation programs at Hunter and Hunter's been
one of the voices talking to the state. I'd like to believe I had some
small positive voice in this effort.

Related are the programs that are one piece of form and one committee
short of being approved. Very soon Hunter will have CS teacher
preparation programs - a full Masters program, a certificate program
and an Alt Cert program. While no program is perfect, I'm very proud
in what I designed and am confident that any teacher that completes
a Hunter program will be amazingly well prepared to teach CS. Not
just the popular curricula being offered today and not just the out of
the box curricula being lauded by others. Our teachers will be
empowered to create their own custom educational experiences
appropriate for their kids.

I've said before that I believe in teacher over curriculum. A great
teacher can save the worst course but the best curriculum can't save a
weak teacher. No matter what happens with CS Ed as a whole, I know
that the CS teachers we prepare at Hunter will be top flight. Kids in
their classes will be alright regardless of what the education machine
tries to impose on them.

The other thing I've been working on, albeit in a limited way is
professional development. There's a lot of CS PD around but most of it
seems to be either for the younger levels or the intro levels. Very
little for APCS-A let alone beyond. This past November I was able to
host teachers from a handful of schools on Election Day for what
everyone felt was one of their more productive PD experiences. We're
following this up with another one in the Spring but this time we're
expanding. I've been talking to friends at [[http://tealsk12.org][TEALS]] so as to get more
teachers and schools involved. There's a lot of value in connecting
teachers with each other and I hope that I'm helping to do that.

I'm looking forward to 2018. I'm told that NYSED should vote on CS
certification in March and my programs should also be on the books
around then. The challenge will be building capacity since I can't do
this as a one man show.

I'm very proud of what we've accomplished at Hunter on both the
education side and the CS side. It's been a good year and I expect
2018 to be a better one.













