---
title: "Awards for Educators"
date: 2016-04-27
tags:
- policy
draft: false
---


There are all sorts of awards for teachers. The Presidential awards,
NEA awards, National and State level awards, and more. There are also
awards and honors given in more narrow areas like NCTM for math and
our own ACM.

I've haven't won any and never expected to. I've never played well
with the establishment.

It's ok though. For every honoree that I can point to and say "there's
a master teacher," there are half a dozen who you look at just know
that it was more about politics and connections than about teaching
chops.

Like anyone else, though, I do like a pat on the back and it is nice
to get some confirmation that you're having a positive effect on kids
lives.

So what are my awards? Well, I received what I consider my highest
honor this past weekend. I was in Hot Springs Arkansas for Jen and
Marcel's wedding.

It was a great weekend with old friends and new celerbrating a
wonderful event and I couldn't be happier for the couple.

As a teacher, to be included in your former students life events is as
big as it gets. I can't begin to say how honored I was to be included
in their day. Even more special, that Marcel's brother Barnabas and
his wife Suki are my oldest couple - they started dating back in my
class back in the beginning.

It's not the first time I've been invited to former students
weddings. I've seen around a dozen or so of my students wed. Every
time it's special, just as it's special when a former student decides
to reach out to let me know how they're doing or to reconnect in
general. When they elect to share part of their lives with me, it
tells me that I was at least a little bit of a force for good way back
when.



