---
title: "The Cost of AP Exams"
date: 2017-08-17
tags:
- education
-  policy
-  ap
-  csed
draft: false
---

Now that I'm back from vacation and summer's winding down I thought
I'd start getting back to more classroom related posts. I still have a
few summer topics I want to write about -- standards and side projects
in particular but I'm also looking forward to talking more about the
classroom since, after all, at my core, I'm a teacher. When I saw [[http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2017/08/how_online_textbooks_could_help_more_students_take_ap_exams.html][this]]
article in my inbox this morning I thought I'd talk about it.

In the piece, Lindsey Tepe since more kids are taking AP classes and
they're very expensive, schools should look to lower other costs
related to AP classes so as to provide financial support so that
students can take that oh so important end of year exam:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
While the College Board continues to reimburse about one-third of the
test cost for eligible low-income students, only about half of states
are now offering any further financial assistance for students.
#+END_QUOTE

Ms. Tepe's solution? Lower text book costs. As a way of lowering
school costs, I'm all for it. I've used free online resources in lieu
of textbooks for years but the savings should go somewhere where it
can make a difference. Perhaps lowering class sizes. The fatal flaw in
Ms. Teps's piece is that it continues spinning the misplaced narrative
that AP Exams are a very important part of a child's education.

Let's be reminded of something: The AP Exam is one thing - an exam - a
single test at the end of the year.

The narrative is that students should take more and more AP classes,
that they're somehow better for kids. Part of this is due to the
potential college credit and part is because the public has been
bamboozled by the ridiculous school ratings that give credit for AP
classes taken. Back in "the day," AP classes were basically early
college. You could then argue that they were the most rigorous classes
offered in a school. AP Calc was basically college Calc. Same for
APCS-AB, AP-Bio and the rest. Now, with classes like APCS-P aimed to
be accessible to typical high school students in the lower grades,
they can't (but still will) make that claim. In fact, at Stuy, my
former school, there are plenty of non AP classes that are more
rigorous than AP classes and the best AP teachers don't always cover
the whole syllabus because they're more concerned with their students
actually learning rather than scoring 5 on an exam.

On the college credit front, if a student has a high probability of
saving money through AP credit then I'm all for it but otherwise, it's
just money going to the college board.

It seems ridiculous for me to have to write this but the important
part of a class is, you know, the class. Not the single exam given by
an outside agency at the end and graded after the semester concludes.

My suggestion? Offer college level work to students that are ready for
it but don't push the AP exam. This would save a ton of money. What value
does the college board actually bring to the table? Remember, they're
making a pretty penny on all of this testing. A math teacher should be
able to teach calculus with or without AP. A good text being used by
that teacher in class - be it free or paid for is actually much more
important to a student learning calculus than a single exam taken at
the end of the year. I'd go further and say that I'd trust the
teacher's exam more than the college board's. If a teacher knows the
math but needs to see some sample syllabi, they're a web search
way. The same is true for most other college courses that have AP
equivalents and maybe even more so for computer science.

At the end of the day it should be about students learning not about
students taking high stakes exams.






