---
title: "CS Ed advocates should pay attention to greater ed issues"
date: 2017-07-18
tags:
- policy
-  cs
-  education
draft: false
---

For anyone involved in K12 CS education, the past few years have been
a wild ride. When I first tried to make inroads in the DOE decades ago
I couldn't get through the door. Now, CS Education is everyone's
darling. It's really amazing. It's been a combination of grass roots
efforts by teachers, non profit education efforts such as [[http://teals12k.org][TEALS]], advocacy of
groups like [[http://code.org][Code.org]] and amazing individuals like [[http://avc.com/2017/06/bearing-witness/][Fred Wilson]] who has
probably done more to move the needle of CS Ed in NY than any other 10
people combined.

While everyone agrees that to do CS education right at the K12 level
we need great teachers and lots of them, everyone also knows that
teachers voices are often unheard. The voices with the greatest weight
belong to the large non-profits, principals, superintendents and
local politicians.

Today's post is a plea to those with voices to think about the effects
of their advocacy for CS Ed to the greater education landscape.

I started thinking about this recently as I've been developing the
CS teacher certification programs for Hunter College. As I spoke to
people across the nation I found that many of the efforts to
developing teacher certification are what I call the "you take it you
teach it" model. You take an abbreviated version of APCS-A and APCS-P
and you're a certified CS teacher. Just about every real educator feels
that this is ludicrous. Some feel that this can be a first step - get
these credentials to get in the door and then you have three to five
years to really learn your subject and craft. I'm good with that but I
have a problem with anyone who says "you take it you teach it" is good
enough and I've heard of a number of regions that are seriously
considering it.

Why is this so bad and, I'd argue, dangerous? Not merely because we'll
end up with substandard CS teachers for the foreseeable future but
also because it undermines the teaching profession as a whole.

It's no secret that public education is under attack. A number of
states including Wisconsin, Arizona, Oklahoma, New York and Michigan
have considered relaxing the standards to become a teacher to address
a teacher shortage. In their twisted logic, the politicians and
"reformers" say that we can't find enough qualified teachers because
we've made it an untenable career so let's lower standards. You can
argue that any current state's requirements are overly cumbersome but
that's another conversation.

When CS Educators say that all that's needed to teach CS is to sit in
on a two week APCS institute is saying that to teach any subject you
don't need content expertise. This is dangerous to education as a
whole and when power players in the CS Ed movement don't speak up
otherwise or even worse that the stance that "you take it you teach
it" is OK, we're undermining teaching as a profession.

We need our heavy hitters to publicly and privately say that we need a
short term entry into the profession but we absolutely need plans and
pathways so that at the end of the day we have the best prepared
teachers in our schools for CS and for all subjects.

Another issue is when as CS Educators we don't pay attention to the
whole child. I was at a meeting of CSTA people  from about thirty
states a few years ago. Someone asked "how can we advocate for CS when
the school might use it as an excuse to get rid of music?" Cameron
Wilson, at the time a lobbyist for the ACM said something to the
effect of "I'm not concerned with other subjects, my concern is
getting CS into the schools." I get it, he was employed to stump CS
but we have to remember that we're only a piece of the puzzle. We want
a seat at the table but we have to make sure that the table is
populated with everyone needed to provide a great education for our
kids.

A final issue I'll mention here is how so many CS educators are so
close to the College Board. It was very disturbing that so many CS Ed
players were pushing for more students to take the APCS exam. Not the
class, not some other CS class but the APCS exam. AP is an extremely
controversial subject among teachers and many of us feel that too many
kids take too many AP classes and certainly too many exams. Remember,
the College Board is the organization that pushes things like the
PSAT8/9 another meaningless but high stakes exam inflicted upon our
kids at taxpayer expense. I understand that AP makes things easy -
they have courses, curricula, etc. but we've given the college board
an outsized influence on CS education and we're not paying attention
to their outsized influence on education in general.

I'm just a small time teacher. I don't have a national voice. I'm
urging those that do:
- Look into what's going on in greater education. Look at the way
public education has been under attack and why.
- Look at the side affects of our choices - who we partner with and
what policies we push.

We might not agree on the right path but everyone with a voice in CS
Education should be having hard conversations about this and then
strongly advocating for the positions they feel correct.
