---
title: "Self Certification - not a good idea"
date: 2017-07-07
tags:
- education
-  policy
-  certification
draft: false
---

You've probably seen an image like this:

#+ATTR_HTML: :align center
[[file:/img/dont-self-certify/self-signed.png]]

It's what you see when you try to access a secure web site but the web
site itself certified itself as being secure.

When people see this on a professional site it sets off all manner of
red flags. We feel much more comfortable when go to a site and we
don't see that error. When we see the secure green lock in the url bar
indicating that this site is certified through an external trusted
source.

Let's take this a step further. If you needed surgery would you go to
a board certified surgeon or would you go to Dr. Nick Riviera or some
other "self certified" doctor? Likewise you wouldn't want to be
represented in court by someone who hasn't passed the bar.

We might not feel that these certification and licensing processes are
perfect but when we need the services of a doctor or lawyer, we're
happy these gatekeepers exist.

So we should all be extremely concerned with today's announcement that
the deal for mayoral control just brokered in NYC came with strings
attached and one of those strings looks to open the doors to give some
charter chains the ability to self certify their teachers.

Here's a story on it in [[http://www.politico.com/states/new-york/city-hall/story/2017/07/06/with-city-charters-poised-to-win-certification-deal-education-schools-fret-113243][Politico]] and one in [[http://www.chalkbeat.org/posts/ny/2017/07/06/some-charter-school-teachers-could-become-certified-without-a-masters-under-proposed-new-suny-rules/][Chalkbeat]].

One might think that some requirements to become a teacher are
ridiculous. I'll get to them later  but this is really giving the fox
the keys to the henhouse.

Charters appear to have extremely high rates of teacher attrition so
it makes sense that they want to control their teacher pipeline. This
alone should be a red flag against self certification but what else
are charter chains known for?
- Misleading stats - claiming amazing passing numbers on standardized
exams while neglecting to mention that somehow or other big blocks
of students were removed from the school prior to the test year
([[http://www.shankerinstitute.org/blog/student-attrition-and-backfilling-success-academy-charter-schools-what-student-enrollment][link]]).
- The gotta go list
- Forcing high levels of parent involvement (tough for single working
parents)
- Charging [[http://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/education/article/KIPP-schools-collected-millions-in-unallowable-11257006.php][illegal fees]].

Top this off with as taking resources from public schools.

Charters operate in anything but a transparent manner and we're
expected to trust them to prepare "highly effective" teachers? I don't
think so. Since there is no real accountability for charter schools -
they can easily game the system through student attrition, selective
admissions (by putting up barriers to enter the lottery) and test prep
they can pay lip service to teacher preparation and the public will be
none the wiser.

If we had a reasonable way of holding principals accountable and no,
test scores are not the answer then we could pretty much do away
with teacher certification. If principals were held to task to run an
effective school, something we can easily define but not measure, then
they would have every incentive to hire the best
teachers. Unfortunately we're nowhere near that place.

Since we're not, we're left with the current systems of teacher
certification that has it's own slew of problems. A big part of it, in
my opinion is that schools of education have lost the high
ground. While there are some institutions doing great work, reputation
wise, schools of education are held in very low regard. Strong
teachers trade stories of the watered down content classes and waste
of time classes where professors share their pet theories of
education. I can't tell you how many times I've heard the new
definitive way to teach. At the same time, education research is
frequently held in low regard by teachers and the general public.

On the one hand we have charters run by and support by non-educators
wanting us to trust them and on the other we have institutions that
are questioned by the teachers they produce and the general public.

What a mess.

I don't know the answer. I'm working on teacher certifications
programs at Hunter and it's a balancing act. How much content is
sufficient and how much is too much. Can any of the general content be
streamlined or is it all necessary. If it isn't necessary do we need
it anyway to satisfy the bean counters?

If you don't have enough then we're sending unprepared teachers into
the classroom. Too much and we'll drive potential teachers away.

As computer science education is defining itself we see similar
struggles. We have some people advocating certifications analogous to
existing teacher certifications. On the other extreme we have
advocates for two weeks summer training and you're a CS teacher. I'd
like to think that I'm advocating for the sweet spot. Strong content
knowledge not tied to a specific course and matching content related
pedagogy. Time will tell becomes the certification standard and time
will tell whose approach was right.

For now, it's important not to give away the store. Private charter
schools should not be the driving force behind teacher certification
and they certainly shouldn't be allowed to train their own teachers
and then 'teach' our students without much greater scrutiny.


* Addendum:

I'm sure some of my friends will point out that private schools aren't
held to any particular standard for teacher certification. This is
true but private schools don't take public funds. Actually they do but
in my opinion, they shouldn't. I maintain that charter schools are
publicly funded private schools in that they take public money but
operate as private entities. As such they should be held under the
greatest of scrutiny and standards -- they aren't


