---
title: "A new first language? What's the follow up plan?"
date: 2017-04-21
tags:
- pedagogy
-  cs
-  langauges
draft: false
---

This morning, [[https://twitter.com/guzdial][Mark Guzdial]] wrote about Stanford possibly [[https://computinged.wordpress.com/2017/04/21/cs-department-updates-introductory-courses-java-is-gone/][moving away
from Java]] as their intro language. This comes on the heels of a
semi-regular thread on one of the lists I'm on asking about what
languages are used at assorted colleges around the country. Invariably
the Pascal -> C++ -> Java progression of APCS turns up in these
threads.

There are plenty of arguments to be made both for and against pretty
much any language or platform. There's no single best universal
answer. Each choice giveth and each choice taketh away.

What I'm really curious about is who's looking at intro languages in
the context of complete programs or even complete educations that
could span multiple institutions.

Early language choices can make a big difference in engaging and
exciting newcomers but there are ramifications later on that few seem
to consider.

Take the APCS change from C++ to Java. It removed memory management
from the first year course. It also simplified issues relating to
pass by value vs pass by reference (or, rather, passing address by
value), bought much more strongly into OOP and moved more towards
using built in implementations of data structures like Lists rather
than rolling your own.

Removing memory management from the first year course in and of itself
isn't a problem as long as it's taught and taught effectively
somewhere later on. It could be argued that "memory is already covered
in our required systems course." That could be the case, but there are
many concepts that kids don't get the first time around. Is an
institution that covered memory management in CS1/2 and then came back
to it in a later Systems course giving their students the same
understanding now that they've eliminated the CS1/2 experience?

What about OOP buy in. Personally, I've never been a big OOP fan but
that's neither here nor there. What I have found is that depending on
how a student is exposed to programming in CS1/CS2 can have a big
influence on how they approach problems later. Did the move to Java
cause more of our students to try to use shoehorn OOP into a problem
that really shouldn't be approached in an OOP manner?

I suspect that the use of built in data structures has had a
negative impact. A few years after the switch to Java, I was talking
to a senior tech worker. He was having a bad day - interviewing
potential internees and full time engineers. My friend was complaining
that the kids couldn't come up with solutions to what he thought were
pretty straightforward questions. He felt that had the kids actually
implemented algorithms like the nlogn sorts rather than just learning
java .sort method and just talking about the algorithm they'd be
better prepared. I've heard this sentiment repeated over and over
throughout the years.

This is not to say that Java is a horrible language or horrible for
teaching - that's another debate. The point is that you can't just
look at the intro class and who it draws in. You have to consider how
it will prepare students for the next level and you have to look at
the big picture -- will our students get everything they need by the
time they leave us.

Many schools have moved to Python. Will that effect students take on
type systems later on? Will the flexibility and constructs like list
comprehensions make it harder to teach recursion since there are
"easier" ways to do it?

None of these are really problems so long as the CS1/2 (or even CS0)
isn't taught in a vacuum.

I fear, however that too often we're paying attention to the intake of
the pipe and not so much the output.






