---
title: "How early for APCS"
date: 2018-07-15
tags:
- apcs
-  ap
draft: false
---

In what grade should students take APCS? This question comes up from
time to time.

I've heard answers ranging from middle school through never. Infact,
years ago, my chairman relayed a conversation he had with Marvin
Minsky where he asked Minsky what the high schools should be teaching
with respect to CS. The answer was "nothing." This was then amended to
"teach them to type." Of course this was a long time ago but I believe
the sentiment was that college was the right time and the high schools
don't know what they're doing and will just screw up the
kids. Actually, I still see some of this attitude today and it gets
passed down where high school teachers sometimes don't want the
middle schools to "mess up their kids" and on down the line.

At this point, it's pretty clear that you can do good CS at the high
school level and as things are being pushed down the grades we'll
eventually figure out what's right and when.

Still, within the high school the question of what grade for APCS-A
remains.

There isn't a single right answer for this but I can share
my experience and what I ended up deciding when I developed things at
Stuy.


* MATH BOOKS and Physics First

As parents, my wife and I learned early on that we'd have to
supplement what our kids would learn in school, particularly in terms
of math and science. I was in charge of math. Since I used assorted
books to help, math time came to be known simply as "MATH BOOKS." It's
funny that now while my kids don't look back super fondly on MATH BOOKS
they agree that it was an important thing for us to do.

I discovered, as I'm sure many parents do, that there are times when a
kid is just not ready for a subject. At one point I tried to introduce
Algebra too early and saw it wasn't going to take so I pulled back. A
while later, we tried again. This time it was clear that they could do
the mechanics and solve problems based on rules and formulae but they
really didn't "get it." A third attempt some time later, they were
ready. They mastered the subject with deep understanding easily. It
could be argued that the early exposure helped but I don't think it
did.

The takeaway here is that kids can do the mechanics and appear to
succeed but if it's too early, they don't really learn the subject.

I saw this on a larger scale with "Physics First." At Stuy, most
freshmen would take Bio in 9th grade followed by Chem and then Physics
in their Junior year. Physics first kids would take Physics in the 9th
grade. I don't have any evidence for this but based on my inquiries
over the years it seemed that the kids who took physics in their
junior year had a deeper understanding of the subject.

I also personally saw this when teaching math classes early on in my
career. Most Stuy freshmen take geometry. The math aces take
precalc or calc but a few weren't math aces but were the star in their
middle school. They were pushed through geometry in 8th  grade and
started Stuy in Algebra 2 and Trig. The majority of these kids that I
taught could spit back all the formulas and theorems from geometry but
very few were actually ready for Alg2/Trig and struggled
considerably.



* APCS

So what about APCS? At Stuy we always taught a superset of the old
APCS-AB. It's mostly APCS-A in the Fall semester and Data Structures
in the Spring. When I started, there was no prerequisite for APCS so I
had students in all grades. Mostly Juniors and Seniors but a few
Sophomores. I think I only had a freshman in APCS once and they were
an outlier.

Some of my sophomores were ready, more could merely spit back material
and do the mechanics - enough to pass the APCS-AB exam but they really
didn't get it. There were some, however that weren't ready. These were
very bright kids and while I can't say for sure, deep down I very much
suspect that if they took my class a year later they would have done
much better and they might have followed a very different path towards
their future.

As a teachers we can change lives for the better and in fact save
lives. We can also do great damage. Because of the latter, teachers
should follow the mantra "first do no harm." This led me to a general
rule of taking kids into APCS-AB until their junior year. If I were to
allow a sophomore in I wanted to be pretty sure that the kid was
ready.

Later we were able to create a sophomore year CS requirement which
gave all kids exposure to CS prior to APCS-A (we still taught AB but
by now only the A exam was offered) and also gave us a platform to vet
the outliers who might be ready for APCS. For those kids, in addition
to an interview we had them self study APCS-A, do a project and sit
for the APCS-A final exam and then we'd add them to the second half of
our AP class.

* Has it worked?

By and large the system has worked. Kids now get an intro in the 10th
grade followed by APCS in 11 and more electives if desired in the
12th. For the kid that's truly ready for APCS in the 10th grade, we
have a path. We don't make it easy but the path is there.

Over the years we've had some CS superstars come through the
program. Some have pushed back -- "why do I have to take the intro?"
"Why can't i start right away in APCS?" -- after all was said and
done, all but one came back to say that we did it the right way and
that they benefited from all our classes.

At Stuy, it seems that for most students, 11th grade is right for our
APCS. Between academic maturity, other classes, scheduling and
everything else, it seems that this works the best for us.

* Why the rush?

Frequently the question as to when to teach APCS revolves around how
early it can be taught. I have to ask - why are we so caught up with
doing things so early?

If we're just pushing college level courses down to high school then
what's the point? The kids will have to take the classes again if
they're going to major in CS anyway.

If you have a program that doesn't duplicate college courses you might
want to have kids finish APCS-A earlier but I wonder how early you
really need.

As a society we keep pushing things down younger and younger. We're
pushing AP classes like history or APCS-P down to 10th grade or even
earlier. You have to ask, is a course that's developmentally
appropriate for a 18-22 year old developmentally appropriate for a 14
or 15 year old? Probably not. You also have to ask that if it makes
more sense to push further ahead or if it's better to do enrichment at
a level the kids can handle.

I'm an enrichment over acceleration guy but other people differ. Just
like the question of when for APCS, there's probably not a single
right answer to this.

* Last words and what should you do?

As I said up front, there's no right answer to this. I'm still
convinced that 11th grade is probably the best general entry point for
APCS-AB but if I were only teaching APCS-A maybe I'd shift it down a
year. My gut tells me no, partially based on teaching non APCS to 8th,
9th, and 10th graders but maybe. Of course, we all teach different
students in different environments so your mileage may vary.

There are also those outlier kids that can truly master the subject at
an earlier age, I'm not really considering them here but they should
be accommodated when possible.

If you've been running a program for a while, look at the data - not
how many kids pass the exam - look at how many master the next level
material. If your kids next class is data structures in college, find
out how well prepared they were and see if and how it maps to the
grade in which they took APCS. If you're just starting, I'd recommend
erring on the side of caution - remember "do no harm."

If you have to teach CS and it turns out you have to teach it when the
kids are too young to master APCS-A then don't teach APCS-A, teach
great CS at a level that's appropriate.

All of this will work itself out in time. Until we get there, there
will be some mis-steps - I know I've had mine. As long
as we continue to move the kids forward and give them something that they
wouldn't have been getting otherwise while we figure all this out,
we're doing pretty good.
