---
title: "Is Cs for All Worth Doing"
date: 2018-05-26
tags:
- csforall
draft: false
---

Last time I mentioned the pushback on CS for All. While many people
are all in for CS for All, resistance is coming from many
areas. There's resistance from teachers of other subject areas, people
who think it's merely job training for the tech industry (which it can be if done poorly),
people who feel it will be implemented at the expense of other
important subjects already on the chopping block like music and art,
and others.

When I started the intro course at Stuy I tried to design something
that would be of value to all Stuy students and also inspire some to
continue on to more advanced CS classes. The class has been a
requirement for well over a decade at this point. I know that not
everyone loved the course but as they say, the proof is in the
pudding. It clearly got more people into the pool as gender numbers
for our more advanced CS courses got and remained much better since
the intro class became a requirement. I can't tell you how many people
now in tech have told me that they never considered CS and only got
into it from our intro course.

So, we had CS for All at Stuy before there was a CS for All and if
exposing more kids to CS was the only benefit it would have been worth
it but there's more. In addition to getting more people and more
underrepresented people into tech, I've had scores of kids in a huge
range of fields come back to exclaim the value of having been forced
to take our intro course. These kids became authors, lawyers,
entrepreneurs, (non CS) teachers, journalists, venture capitalists,
Wall Street people, (non CS) professors and researchers, and more.

The benefit of being in the latter stages of a career is that you can
look back at years of results and see the good and the bad.

There's no doubt in my mind that the battle to get a good CS course to
every Stuy student was one worth fighting and winning.


