---
title: "Should We Teach HTML?"
date: 2016-05-09
tags:
- shell
-  cli
-  tools
draft: false
---

Yesterday, [[https://twitter.com/dougpete][Doug Peterson]] wrote a "Whatever happened to" post subtitled
[[https://dougpete.wordpress.com/2016/05/08/whatever-happened-to-5/][HTML as an essential 21st Century skill?]] It's a nice post.

I left a comment but thought I'd elaborate here.

No, knowing HTML is not programming - it's markup. Even so, when I
help people design CS programs, I'll frequently recommend starting
with HTML or at least introducing it early.

Why?

It's a gateway and not just to programming.

HTML is pretty easy, you want **something** bold, you just wrap the
word in =<b>= and =</b>=:

#+BEGIN_SRC HTML
{{< highlight "HTML" >}}
<b>something</b>
{{< / highlight >}}
#+END_SRC

It's also empowering and demystifies the web. Kids can create a simple
web page and load it right into their browser.

It's true that today's web pages are chock-full-o javascript and css
but with just the basics, students can get the idea. You can also show
them pages by right clicking and viewing source.

You can even have them change a live page.

Try it.

Right click on the top of this page where it says "Musings about..."
Chose **inspect element**. In the "debugger" window double click the
text, change it and hit enter. This is just temporary - just reload
the page but it's pretty neat for a kid to change an article and then
screenshot it.

HTML is also a nice stepping stone towards coding. You're working in a
plain text editor by adding special code words to basic text which are
then interpreted by, in this case, the web browser.

The big reason for teaching html actually goes beyond this. Next step
after learning HTML is having the kids programatically generating web
pages in whatever language you're using for the class. I like using
Python. This requires a little infrastructure setup to serve kids work
but then there are two huge wins.

First, as the kids learn programming, instead of just printing out
results, they can make a web site with their results and share it with
friends, family, and the world.

The other big bonus is that kids might be able to leverage take these
skills to other classes. If the student has a history paper to write,
maybe the teacher will accept a history web site where the student can
write code to do their analytics and build nice looking tables and
graphs with results.

So while knowledge of HTML in and of itself isn't really needed
anymore it's still an important part of the programs I build.

